<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en" amzn-src-id="163124">
  <head amzn-src-id="163125">
    <title amzn-src-id="163126">Chapter 60: Teaching with This Book</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="163127" />
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="163128" />
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="163129" />
  </head>
  <body amzn-src-id="163130">
<h1 amzn-src-id="163131">Chapter 60: Teaching with This Book</h1>

<blockquote class="epigraph" amzn-src-id="163132">
<p amzn-src-id="163133">"I taught the loop three times: once as math, once as code, and once when the lab robot ignored both."</p>
<cite amzn-src-id="163134">A Patient Instructor Controller</cite>
</blockquote>
<div class="callout big-picture" amzn-src-id="163135">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="163136">Big Picture</div>
<p amzn-src-id="163137"><strong amzn-src-id="163138">Teaching with This Book</strong> closes the book by turning advanced embodied AI ideas into artifacts: memory traces, continual-learning panels, frontier claim audits, capstone deliverables, and teaching plans. The chapter offers graduate, advanced undergraduate, two-term, and seminar paths. Each path keeps the book rhythm intact: mechanism, build, shortcut, audit, and reflection.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout key-insight" amzn-src-id="163139">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="163140">Chapter Through-Line</div>
<p amzn-src-id="163141">Teaching embodied AI works best when each week ends in an artifact that makes perception, action, evaluation, and reflection visible. Read the chapter by asking the same four questions on every page: what changes in the loop, what evidence is saved, what can fail, and which tool makes the practical path shorter.</p>
</div>
<div class="overview" amzn-src-id="163142">
<h2 amzn-src-id="163143">Chapter Overview</h2>
<p amzn-src-id="163144">Chapter 60 is a deployment guide for instructors. It maps the book into a one-semester graduate course, an advanced undergraduate adaptation, a two-semester sequence, a research seminar, an infrastructure plan, and a grading framework that stays aligned with the book's engineering values.</p>
<p amzn-src-id="163145">The chapter treats curriculum design as a systems problem. Weekly pacing, lab architecture, compute budgets, capstone milestones, and rubric weights are all part of the same teaching loop, because course structure determines which embodied-AI habits students actually internalize.</p>
</div>
<div class="prereqs" amzn-src-id="163146"><h3 amzn-src-id="163147">Prerequisites</h3><p amzn-src-id="163148">Readers should be comfortable with Python, tensors, and the perception-action loop. When the chapter uses geometry, control, or probability, the relevant appendices provide a compact refresher.</p></div>
<h2 amzn-src-id="163149">Chapter Roadmap</h2>
<div class="section-grid" amzn-src-id="163150"><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="163151">60.1</span> <a href="ch_0454_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-60-teaching-with-th.xhtml" amzn-src-id="163152"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="163153">One-semester graduate course (14 weeks)</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="163154">Defines a research-oriented weekly rhythm with artifacts, papers, and capstone milestones.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="163155">60.2</span> <a href="ch_0455_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-60-teaching-with-th.xhtml" amzn-src-id="163156"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="163157">One-semester advanced undergraduate course (lighter theory, more labs)</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="163158">Shows how to reduce formal load without reducing systems depth or debugging honesty.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="163159">60.3</span> <a href="ch_0456_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-60-teaching-with-th.xhtml" amzn-src-id="163160"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="163161">Two-semester sequence</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="163162">Splits foundations and advanced topics into a coherent multi-term progression.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="163163">60.4</span> <a href="ch_0457_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-60-teaching-with-th.xhtml" amzn-src-id="163164"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="163165">Research-seminar track</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="163166">Turns the frontier chapters into a repeatable paper-audit and replication seminar format.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="163167">60.5</span> <a href="ch_0458_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-60-teaching-with-th.xhtml" amzn-src-id="163168"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="163169">Lab infrastructure and compute budgeting for instructors</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="163170">Covers pinned environments, fallback paths, and realistic compute planning.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="163171">60.6</span> <a href="ch_0459_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-60-teaching-with-th.xhtml" amzn-src-id="163172"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="163173">Assessment, rubrics, and academic-integrity notes for code assignments</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="163174">Aligns grading, integrity policy, and evidence bundles with actual engineering understanding.</span></div>
<div class="callout library-shortcut" amzn-src-id="163175">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="163176">Tooling Note</div>
<p amzn-src-id="163177">This chapter uses the right-tool principle. Build the mechanism once, then reach for maintained tools such as MuJoCo, MJX, Isaac Lab, Genesis, Newton, Drake, ROS 2, and modern Gazebo when the task moves from learning exercise to working system.</p>
</div>
<section class="lab" id="lab-60" amzn-src-id="163178">
<h2 amzn-src-id="163179">Hands-On Lab: Design a Course Artifact Pipeline</h2>
<div class="lab-meta" amzn-src-id="163180"><span class="lab-duration" amzn-src-id="163181">Duration: about 50 minutes</span><span class="lab-difficulty" amzn-src-id="163182">Difficulty: Intermediate</span></div>
<div class="lab-objective" amzn-src-id="163183"><h3 amzn-src-id="163184">Objective</h3><p amzn-src-id="163185">Choose one teaching format from the chapter and draft the weekly artifact, compute, and grading pipeline needed to run it reliably.</p></div>
<div class="lab-steps" amzn-src-id="163186"><h3 amzn-src-id="163187">Steps</h3><ol amzn-src-id="163188"><li amzn-src-id="163189">Pick a format: graduate course, undergraduate course, seminar, or two-term sequence.</li><li amzn-src-id="163190">List three representative weekly artifacts and the infrastructure each one needs.</li><li amzn-src-id="163191">Assign one fallback path for a lab that exceeds local hardware or time limits.</li><li amzn-src-id="163192">Write a rubric with separate weights for implementation, evidence, and failure analysis.</li><li amzn-src-id="163193">Summarize one risk that would break the course if left implicit.</li></ol></div>
</section>
<div class="whats-next" amzn-src-id="163194"><h3 amzn-src-id="163195">What's Next?</h3><p amzn-src-id="163196">Continue with <a href="ch_0454_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-60-teaching-with-th.xhtml" amzn-src-id="163197">Section 60.1: One-semester graduate course (14 weeks)</a>, where the chapter moves from motivation to the first concrete idea.</p></div>
<p amzn-src-id="163198">This chapter is written for readers who want to teach from the book without inventing a curriculum from scratch. Read each section twice: first as pedagogy, then as an operations plan for weeks, repositories, environments, and grading workflows.</p>
<div class="comparison-table" amzn-src-id="163199">
<div class="comparison-table-title" amzn-src-id="163200">Chapter Tool Map</div>
<table amzn-src-id="163201">
<thead amzn-src-id="163202"><tr amzn-src-id="163203"><th amzn-src-id="163204">Tool or Library</th><th amzn-src-id="163205">Where It Pays Off</th></tr></thead>
<tbody amzn-src-id="163206">
<tr amzn-src-id="163207"><td amzn-src-id="163208">Jupyter and Colab</td><td amzn-src-id="163209">Use for low-friction labs, scaffolded assignments, and shareable artifact notebooks.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="163210"><td amzn-src-id="163211">MuJoCo, Isaac Lab, and simulator presets</td><td amzn-src-id="163212">Use when a course needs repeatable embodied environments without full robot hardware dependence.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="163213"><td amzn-src-id="163214">GitHub Classroom, CI, and grading rubrics</td><td amzn-src-id="163215">Use for assignment distribution, reproducibility checks, and structured feedback.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="163216"><td amzn-src-id="163217">LeRobot and pinned model checkpoints</td><td amzn-src-id="163218">Use when students need modern embodied-policy examples without building every stack from zero.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="163219"><td amzn-src-id="163220">Replay exporters and logging dashboards</td><td amzn-src-id="163221">Use when teaching students to defend evidence rather than only final scores.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
<div class="callout lab" amzn-src-id="163222"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="163223">Chapter Lab Extension</div><p amzn-src-id="163224">Extend the course-pipeline lab by adding one pinned environment file, one hardware fallback policy, and one oral or written integrity check tied to the artifact bundle.</p></div>
<section class="production-index-depth-topup" amzn-src-id="163225">
<p amzn-src-id="163226">The chapter can be read by individual instructors, teaching assistants, and program designers. Its main claim is that embodied-AI teaching quality depends on structure: explicit artifacts, realistic lab budgets, stable repository conventions, and rubrics that reward explanation and evidence.</p>
<p amzn-src-id="163227">For course design, the practical stack should be introduced as a set of operational choices rather than a shopping list. Every tool should earn its place by shortening setup time, improving reproducibility, or exposing an interface students will actually meet in research and deployment work.</p>
<div class="callout self-check" amzn-src-id="163228"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="163229">Readiness Check</div><p amzn-src-id="163230">Before leaving the chapter, the reader should be able to state one theory claim, one implementation claim, one evaluation claim, and one realistic failure mode. If any of those four are missing, the chapter should be revisited through the lab.</p></div>
<div class="callout key-takeaway" amzn-src-id="163231"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="163232">Teaching Takeaway</div><p amzn-src-id="163233">A strong chapter session ends with an artifact: a small script, a plotted trace, a simulator run, a data card, or a reproducible evaluation panel. The artifact is what turns reading into embodied-system-building practice.</p></div>
</section>
<section class="chapter-production-blueprint" amzn-src-id="163234">
<h2 amzn-src-id="163235">Reader Outcomes And Assessment Pattern</h2>
<p amzn-src-id="163236">The chapter offers graduate, advanced undergraduate, two-term, and seminar paths while preserving one shared teaching philosophy: every week should leave behind a reproducible artifact, and every artifact should be tied to a reflection or defense step. By the end, the reader should be able to turn the book into a course that is rigorous, modern, and operationally realistic.</p>
<div class="comparison-table" amzn-src-id="163237">
<div class="comparison-table-title" amzn-src-id="163238">Chapter Production Checklist</div>
<table amzn-src-id="163239">
<thead amzn-src-id="163240"><tr amzn-src-id="163241"><th amzn-src-id="163242">Dimension</th><th amzn-src-id="163243">What The Reader Produces</th><th amzn-src-id="163244">Quality Gate</th></tr></thead>
<tbody amzn-src-id="163245">
<tr amzn-src-id="163246"><td amzn-src-id="163247">Mechanism</td><td amzn-src-id="163248">A concise explanation of the loop component changed by course design.</td><td amzn-src-id="163249">The explanation names observation, state, action, and feedback.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="163250"><td amzn-src-id="163251">Implementation</td><td amzn-src-id="163252">A baseline plus a maintained-tool route using Colab notebooks, local simulators, shared logs.</td><td amzn-src-id="163253">The two routes save the same artifact schema.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="163254"><td amzn-src-id="163255">Evaluation</td><td amzn-src-id="163256">A same-panel metric comparison with perturbation and failure labels.</td><td amzn-src-id="163257">Numbers are co-computed in one run on one config.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="163258"><td amzn-src-id="163259">Communication</td><td amzn-src-id="163260">A short postmortem that distinguishes concept, system, and evidence claims.</td><td amzn-src-id="163261">The postmortem includes one limitation and one next test.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
<div class="callout lab" amzn-src-id="163262"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="163263">Chapter Lab Frame</div><p amzn-src-id="163264">Run the chapter as a two-pass build. First, implement the smallest baseline that exposes the mechanism. Second, replace the brittle part with the maintained tool that preserves the same contract. The deliverable is a folder with code, config, logs, plots or traces, and labeled failures.</p></div>
</section>
<section class="bibliography" amzn-src-id="163265">
<h2 amzn-src-id="163266">Bibliography &amp; Further Reading</h2>
<h3 amzn-src-id="163267">Foundational Papers, Tools, and References</h3>
<div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="163268">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="163269">Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G.. "Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction." (2018). <a href="http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html" amzn-src-id="163270">http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="163271">A foundation for value functions, policy gradients, exploration, and the RL framing used throughout the book.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="163272">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="163273">Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y.. "MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control." (2012). <a href="https://mujoco.org/" amzn-src-id="163274">https://mujoco.org/</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="163275">The simulator lineage behind much modern robot learning, now extended through MJX and Warp workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="163276">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="163277">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-1: Robotics Transformer for real-world control at scale." (2022). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817" amzn-src-id="163278">https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="163279">A landmark in large-scale robot policy learning with transformer policies.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="163280">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="163281">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818" amzn-src-id="163282">https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="163283">A central reference for connecting web-scale VLM knowledge to robot actions.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="163284">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="163285">Open X-Embodiment Collaboration. "Open X-Embodiment: Robotic Learning Datasets and RT-X Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864" amzn-src-id="163286">https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="163287">The cross-embodiment data and transfer reference used by the data chapters.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="163288">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="163289">Chi, C. et al.. "Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137" amzn-src-id="163290">https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="163291">The practical diffusion policy reference for imitation learning and continuous action generation.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="163292">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="163293">Hafner, D. et al.. "Mastering Diverse Domains through World Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104" amzn-src-id="163294">https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="163295">DreamerV3, a modern reference for latent world models and imagination-based control.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="163296">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="163297">Hugging Face. "LeRobot." (2024). <a href="https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot" amzn-src-id="163298">https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="163299">The open robot-learning stack used for datasets, policies, demos, and low-cost embodied AI workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="163300">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="163301">Official documentation and source repositories for Teaching with This Book.</p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="163302">Use official docs to check install commands, current APIs, and version caveats before applying Teaching with This Book in a lab or project.</p>
</div>
</section>




</body>
</html>
