<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en" amzn-src-id="107495">
  <head amzn-src-id="107496">
    <title amzn-src-id="107497">Chapter 36: Predicting the Future</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="107498" />
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="107499" />
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="107500" />
  </head>
  <body amzn-src-id="107501">
<h1 amzn-src-id="107502">Chapter 36: Predicting the Future</h1>

<blockquote class="epigraph" amzn-src-id="107503">
<p amzn-src-id="107504">"A robot that predicts badly either hesitates too long or commits too early. Both errors look like intelligence until the first contact event."</p>
<cite amzn-src-id="107505">A Horizon-Aware Predictor</cite>
</blockquote>
<div class="callout big-picture" amzn-src-id="107506">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="107507">Big Picture</div>
<p amzn-src-id="107508"><strong amzn-src-id="107509">Predicting the Future</strong> is where a perception stack becomes a decision stack. These sections move from one-step dynamics to uncertainty, rollout horizon, and planning with predicted futures, always asking whether the forecast changes a real control or safety decision.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout key-insight" amzn-src-id="107510">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="107511">Remember This Chapter</div>
<p amzn-src-id="107512">A useful predictive model earns its keep by improving a closed-loop metric such as stopping margin, contact timing, intervention count, or recovery rate. Open-loop fidelity is evidence, not the final objective.</p>
</div>
<div class="overview" amzn-src-id="107513">
<h2 amzn-src-id="107514">Chapter Overview</h2>
<p amzn-src-id="107515">Chapter 36 turns predictive modeling into an embodied-systems skill. The reader starts with why latency and partial observability force agents to reason ahead, then learns how state-space prediction differs from image reconstruction, why rollout error compounds with horizon, how uncertainty should gate trust, and how a planner consumes predicted futures.</p>
<p amzn-src-id="107516">The practical thread uses small inspectable probes, then points to maintained tools such as MuJoCo, Gymnasium, MJX, and logging stacks for real experiments. The theory thread stays tied to artifacts a lab would actually save: horizon-conditioned error tables, calibration plots, intervention logs, and matched closed-loop panels.</p>
</div>
<div class="prereqs" amzn-src-id="107517"><h3 amzn-src-id="107518">Prerequisites</h3><p amzn-src-id="107519">Readers should be comfortable with state estimation, control loops, and the reinforcement-learning notation from Parts II through IV. Chapter 29 is especially helpful if belief updates and hidden-state estimation feel rusty.</p></div>
<h2 amzn-src-id="107520">Chapter Roadmap</h2>
<div class="section-grid" amzn-src-id="107521"><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="107522">36.1</span> <a href="ch_0281_part-8-world-models-and-model-based-embodied-ai-module-36-predicting-the.xhtml" amzn-src-id="107523"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="107524">Why agents need to predict</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="107525">Motivates prediction from latency, occlusion, and action delay, then ties the idea to closed-loop evidence.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="107526">36.2</span> <a href="ch_0282_part-8-world-models-and-model-based-embodied-ai-module-36-predicting-the.xhtml" amzn-src-id="107527"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="107528">Forward/dynamics models; state vs. observation prediction</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="107529">Contrasts latent-state rollouts with pixel-space forecasting and shows when each target is useful for control.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="107530">36.3</span> <a href="ch_0283_part-8-world-models-and-model-based-embodied-ai-module-36-predicting-the.xhtml" amzn-src-id="107531"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="107532">Error accumulation and horizon</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="107533">Explains compounding rollout error, horizon selection, and why short trusted rollouts often beat long fantasy rollouts.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="107534">36.4</span> <a href="ch_0284_part-8-world-models-and-model-based-embodied-ai-module-36-predicting-the.xhtml" amzn-src-id="107535"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="107536">Uncertainty in prediction</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="107537">Separates aleatoric from epistemic uncertainty and shows how calibration should influence planning.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="107538">36.5</span> <a href="ch_0285_part-8-world-models-and-model-based-embodied-ai-module-36-predicting-the.xhtml" amzn-src-id="107539"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="107540">Planning with predicted futures</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="107541">Connects forecasts to receding-horizon action selection, risk-aware scoring, and robotics failure analysis.</span></div>
<div class="callout library-shortcut" amzn-src-id="107542">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="107543">Tooling Note</div>
<p amzn-src-id="107544">Use hand-built probes to expose assumptions, then switch to maintained stacks when you need speed or scale. Good fits for this chapter include <code amzn-src-id="107545">Gymnasium</code> for environment contracts, <code amzn-src-id="107546">MuJoCo</code> or <code amzn-src-id="107547">MJX</code> for fast rollouts, <code amzn-src-id="107548">PyTorch</code> or <code amzn-src-id="107549">JAX</code> for model training, and experiment loggers such as Weights &amp; Biases or plain versioned JSON artifacts for matched comparisons.</p>
</div>
<section class="lab" id="lab-36" amzn-src-id="107550">
<h2 amzn-src-id="107551">Hands-On Lab: Build A Horizon-Aware Prediction Panel</h2>
<div class="lab-meta" amzn-src-id="107552"><span class="lab-duration" amzn-src-id="107553">Duration: about 90 minutes</span><span class="lab-difficulty" amzn-src-id="107554">Difficulty: Intermediate</span></div>
<div class="lab-objective" amzn-src-id="107555"><h3 amzn-src-id="107556">Objective</h3><p amzn-src-id="107557">Build a small benchmark that trains one predictive model, evaluates horizon-conditioned error, measures calibration, and tests whether a short planning rule benefits from the learned forecast.</p></div>
<div class="lab-skills" amzn-src-id="107558"><h3 amzn-src-id="107559">Skills</h3><ul amzn-src-id="107560"><li amzn-src-id="107561">Specify state, observation, horizon, and action contracts.</li><li amzn-src-id="107562">Compare one-step and multi-step error on the same seed panel.</li><li amzn-src-id="107563">Save a replayable artifact with traces, metrics, and failure labels.</li></ul></div>
<div class="lab-prereqs" amzn-src-id="107564"><h3 amzn-src-id="107565">Prerequisites</h3><p amzn-src-id="107566">Python, NumPy, a simulator with deterministic resets, and a simple robot task with measurable latency or stopping constraints.</p></div>
<div class="lab-steps" amzn-src-id="107567"><h3 amzn-src-id="107568">Steps</h3><ol amzn-src-id="107569"><li amzn-src-id="107570"><h4 amzn-src-id="107571">Step 1: Define targets</h4><p amzn-src-id="107572">Decide whether the model predicts physical state, latent state, reward-relevant quantities, or raw observations. Write the choice down before training.</p></li><li amzn-src-id="107573"><h4 amzn-src-id="107574">Step 2: Train a small predictor</h4><p amzn-src-id="107575">Fit a one-step model and export the rollout script that can evaluate horizons 1 through H on held-out episodes.</p></li><li amzn-src-id="107576"><h4 amzn-src-id="107577">Step 3: Measure uncertainty</h4><p amzn-src-id="107578">Run an ensemble or dropout approximation and record mean error plus interval coverage.</p></li><li amzn-src-id="107579"><h4 amzn-src-id="107580">Step 4: Attach a planner</h4><p amzn-src-id="107581">Use the predictor to choose one-step or short-horizon actions, then compare the planner with a reactive baseline on the same panel.</p></li><li amzn-src-id="107582"><h4 amzn-src-id="107583">Step 5: Write the postmortem</h4><p amzn-src-id="107584">Label failures as data coverage, model bias, decoder mismatch, uncertainty miscalibration, or planner misuse.</p></li></ol></div>
<div class="lab-expected" amzn-src-id="107585"><h3 amzn-src-id="107586">Expected Result</h3><p amzn-src-id="107587">A single folder with training config, held-out rollout traces, horizon error curves, calibration counts, and a short video set showing where prediction helped or hurt action selection.</p></div>
<div class="lab-stretch" amzn-src-id="107588"><h3 amzn-src-id="107589">Stretch Goals</h3><p amzn-src-id="107590">Repeat the same panel with a latent-only predictor and a pixel decoder, then compare which target better supports control on the same matched metric.</p></div>
</section>
<section class="production-index-depth-topup" amzn-src-id="107591">
<p amzn-src-id="107592">This chapter works well as a course week because each section has a natural artifact: a one-step predictor, a horizon error table, an uncertainty calibration summary, and a small planner trace. The didactic move is to make students justify why a prediction target is action-relevant before they spend compute improving it.</p>
<p amzn-src-id="107593">The chapter is also where forecast length should become an explicit budget variable rather than a vague aspiration. Horizon length, model size, calibration method, and replanning rate all trade against one another, so the strongest reader takeaway is not "predict farther" but "predict only as far as the decision loop can trust."</p>
<div class="callout self-check" amzn-src-id="107594"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="107595">Readiness Check</div><p amzn-src-id="107596">Before leaving the chapter, the reader should be able to answer four questions: what is being predicted, why that target matters for action, how far ahead the model is trusted, and which artifact proves that trust is deserved.</p></div>
<div class="callout key-takeaway" amzn-src-id="107597"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="107598">Teaching Takeaway</div><p amzn-src-id="107599">Prediction belongs in an embodied course when it is tied to planning and safety. Forecasts without action consequences are perception exercises, not embodied decision-making.</p></div>
<div class="callout cross-ref" amzn-src-id="107600"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="107601">Chapter Connection</div><p amzn-src-id="107602">For the application of these prediction models to model-based control and MBRL, see <a href="ch_0286_part-8-world-models-and-model-based-embodied-ai-module-37-model-based-rl.xhtml" amzn-src-id="107603">Chapter 37</a>. Section 37.2 covers learned dynamics ensembles used for planning, and Section 37.3 covers CEM, MPPI, and latent MPC built on those models.</p></div>
</section>
<section class="bibliography" amzn-src-id="107604">
<h2 amzn-src-id="107605">Bibliography &amp; Further Reading</h2>
<h3 amzn-src-id="107606">Foundational Papers, Tools, and References</h3>
<div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="107607">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="107608"><span class="bib-meta" amzn-src-id="107609">Reference</span> Ha, D., and Schmidhuber, J.. "World Models." (2018). <a href="https://worldmodels.github.io/" amzn-src-id="107610">https://worldmodels.github.io/</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="107611">A compact starting point for latent dynamics and control from imagined rollouts.</p>
</div>
<div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="107612">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="107613"><span class="bib-meta" amzn-src-id="107614">Reference</span> Hafner, D. et al.. "Learning Latent Dynamics for Planning from Pixels." (2019). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.04551" amzn-src-id="107615">https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.04551</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="107616">PlaNet is the canonical reference for learning latent dynamics that are useful for planning rather than pure reconstruction.</p>
</div>
<div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="107617">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="107618"><span class="bib-meta" amzn-src-id="107619">Reference</span> Hafner, D. et al.. "Mastering Diverse Domains through World Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104" amzn-src-id="107620">https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="107621">DreamerV3 is the current baseline readers should know when connecting prediction to behavior improvement.</p>
</div>
<div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="107622">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="107623"><span class="bib-meta" amzn-src-id="107624">Reference</span> MuJoCo Documentation. "Overview." (accessed 2026). <a href="https://mujoco.readthedocs.io/" amzn-src-id="107625">https://mujoco.readthedocs.io/</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="107626">MuJoCo remains a practical simulator for prediction, state estimation, and model-based control experiments.</p>
</div>
<div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="107627">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="107628"><span class="bib-meta" amzn-src-id="107629">Reference</span> Farama Foundation. "Gymnasium Documentation." (accessed 2026). <a href="https://gymnasium.farama.org/" amzn-src-id="107630">https://gymnasium.farama.org/</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="107631">Gymnasium is a clean interface for experiments where reset, step, truncation, and seeding must stay explicit.</p>
</div>
</section>




</body>
</html>
