<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en" amzn-src-id="51583">
  <head amzn-src-id="51584">
    <title amzn-src-id="51585">Chapter 15: Policy Gradient Methods and PPO</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="51586" />
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="51587" />
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="51588" />
  </head>
  <body amzn-src-id="51589">
<h1 amzn-src-id="51590">Chapter 15: Policy Gradient Methods and PPO</h1>

<blockquote class="epigraph" amzn-src-id="51591"><p amzn-src-id="51592">"Every policy update is a small, cautious bet that yesterday's behavior was close enough to keep."</p><cite amzn-src-id="51593">A Trust-Region Embodied AI Agent</cite></blockquote>
<div class="callout big-picture" amzn-src-id="51594">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="51595">Big Picture</div>
<p amzn-src-id="51596"><strong amzn-src-id="51597">Policy Gradient Methods and PPO</strong> matters because embodied intelligence is a closed loop. The agent must turn partial observations into useful state, choose actions under uncertainty, and learn from the consequences in a physical or simulated world.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout key-insight" amzn-src-id="51598">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="51599">Remember This Chapter</div>
<p amzn-src-id="51600">The core move is to connect policy gradient methods and PPO to action. A static model can be accurate and still be useless if it cannot support timely, safe, and recoverable behavior.</p>
</div>
<div class="overview" amzn-src-id="51601">
<h2 amzn-src-id="51602">Chapter Overview</h2>
<p amzn-src-id="51603">Chapter 15 develops <strong amzn-src-id="51604">Policy Gradient Methods and PPO</strong> as a working piece of the embodied AI stack. The chapter starts with the role this topic plays in the sense, represent, predict, decide, act, observe, and learn loop, then turns that role into a concrete implementation pattern.</p>
<p amzn-src-id="51605">The practical thread uses Gymnasium, CleanRL, Stable-Baselines3, Tianshou, SKRL, RSL-RL, and rl_games where appropriate, while the theory thread keeps the mechanism visible. The reader should leave with both a mental model and a build path.</p>
</div>
<p amzn-src-id="51606">It builds on the RL framing from <a class="cross-ref" href="ch_0118_part-4-reinforcement-learning-for-embodied-agents-module-14-reinforcemen.xhtml" amzn-src-id="51607">Chapter 14: Reinforcement Learning Refresher</a>, contrasts with off-policy learning in <a class="cross-ref" href="ch_0131_part-4-reinforcement-learning-for-embodied-agents-module-16-value-based-.xhtml" amzn-src-id="51608">Chapter 16: Value-Based and Off-Policy Methods</a>, and becomes easier to scale in <a class="cross-ref" href="ch_0137_part-4-reinforcement-learning-for-embodied-agents-module-17-massively-pa.xhtml" amzn-src-id="51609">Chapter 17: Massively Parallel and GPU RL</a>.</p>
<div class="prereqs" amzn-src-id="51610"><h3 amzn-src-id="51611">Prerequisites</h3><p amzn-src-id="51612">Readers should be comfortable with Python, tensors, and the perception-action loop. When the chapter uses geometry, control, or probability, the relevant appendices provide a compact refresher.</p></div>
<h2 amzn-src-id="51613">Chapter Roadmap</h2>
<div class="section-grid" amzn-src-id="51614"><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="51615">15.1</span> <a href="ch_0125_part-4-reinforcement-learning-for-embodied-agents-module-15-policy-gradi.xhtml" amzn-src-id="51616"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="51617">Direct policy optimization; stochastic policies</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="51618">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="51619">15.2</span> <a href="ch_0126_part-4-reinforcement-learning-for-embodied-agents-module-15-policy-gradi.xhtml" amzn-src-id="51620"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="51621">The policy gradient theorem; REINFORCE</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="51622">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="51623">15.3</span> <a href="ch_0127_part-4-reinforcement-learning-for-embodied-agents-module-15-policy-gradi.xhtml" amzn-src-id="51624"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="51625">Actor-critic and advantage estimation (GAE)</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="51626">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="51627">15.4</span> <a href="ch_0128_part-4-reinforcement-learning-for-embodied-agents-module-15-policy-gradi.xhtml" amzn-src-id="51628"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="51629">Trust regions; TRPO to PPO</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="51630">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="51631">15.5</span> <a href="ch_0129_part-4-reinforcement-learning-for-embodied-agents-module-15-policy-gradi.xhtml" amzn-src-id="51632"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="51633">PPO in practice: the implementation details that matter</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="51634">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="51635">15.6</span> <a href="ch_0130_part-4-reinforcement-learning-for-embodied-agents-module-15-policy-gradi.xhtml" amzn-src-id="51636"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="51637">Reward shaping and its hazards</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="51638">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span></div>
<div class="callout library-shortcut" amzn-src-id="51639">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="51640">Tooling Note</div>
<p amzn-src-id="51641">This chapter uses the right-tool principle. Build the mechanism once, then reach for maintained tools such as Gymnasium, CleanRL, Stable-Baselines3, Tianshou, SKRL, RSL-RL, and rl_games when the task moves from learning exercise to working system.</p>
</div>
<section class="lab" id="lab-15" amzn-src-id="51642">
<h2 amzn-src-id="51643">Hands-On Lab: Build a Reproducible Policy Gradient Methods and PPO Panel</h2>
<div class="lab-meta" amzn-src-id="51644"><span class="lab-duration" amzn-src-id="51645">Duration: about 75 minutes</span><span class="lab-difficulty" amzn-src-id="51646">Difficulty: Intermediate</span></div>
<div class="lab-objective" amzn-src-id="51647"><h3 amzn-src-id="51648">Objective</h3><p amzn-src-id="51649">Build a small, reproducible experiment panel for policy gradient and PPO practice: one baseline, one maintained-library implementation, one perturbation test, and one saved evidence record.</p></div>
<div class="lab-skills" amzn-src-id="51650"><h3 amzn-src-id="51651">What You'll Practice</h3><ul amzn-src-id="51652"><li amzn-src-id="51653">Writing an observation, action, reward, and termination contract before training.</li><li amzn-src-id="51654">Using CleanRL or Stable-Baselines3 for the maintained implementation path.</li><li amzn-src-id="51655">Comparing construct-matched metrics from one run configuration.</li><li amzn-src-id="51656">Labeling failures by perception, state, action, timing, reward, or evaluation cause.</li></ul></div>
<div class="lab-prereqs" amzn-src-id="51657"><h3 amzn-src-id="51658">Setup</h3><pre amzn-src-id="51659"><code class="language-bash" amzn-src-id="51660">pip<span class="w" amzn-src-id="51661"> </span>install<span class="w" amzn-src-id="51662"> </span>gymnasium<span class="w" amzn-src-id="51663"> </span>stable-baselines3<span class="w" amzn-src-id="51664"> </span>cleanrl<span class="w" amzn-src-id="51665"> </span>numpy<span class="w" amzn-src-id="51666"> </span>pandas</code></pre><div class="code-caption" amzn-src-id="51667">Code Fragment 15.L1 installs the common RL lab stack used for small local experiments. Replace packages with CleanRL, Stable-Baselines3, or the simulator used by the section when the lab moves beyond the starter panel.</div></div>
<div class="lab-steps" amzn-src-id="51668"><h3 amzn-src-id="51669">Steps</h3><ol amzn-src-id="51670"><li amzn-src-id="51671">Define the task contract in prose: observation, action, reward, termination, success metric, and one safety constraint.</li><li amzn-src-id="51672">Run a tiny baseline for five seeded episodes and save rewards, terminations, and a short failure label for each episode.</li><li amzn-src-id="51673">Run the maintained-library version with the same seeds and the same success metric.</li><li amzn-src-id="51674">Add one perturbation: observation noise, action delay, friction change, sparse reward, or a simulator parameter shift.</li><li amzn-src-id="51675">Save one JSON or CSV artifact containing configuration, seeds, metrics, traces, and failure labels.</li><li amzn-src-id="51676">Write a five-sentence postmortem explaining whether the method improved behavior, diagnostics, or only the headline score.</li></ol></div>
<div class="lab-expected" amzn-src-id="51677"><h3 amzn-src-id="51678">Expected Output</h3><p amzn-src-id="51679">The finished lab produces one table with baseline and library results, one perturbation column, and at least two labeled failure cases. The evidence should be readable without rerunning the code.</p></div>
<div class="lab-stretch" amzn-src-id="51680"><h3 amzn-src-id="51681">Stretch Goals</h3><ul amzn-src-id="51682"><li amzn-src-id="51683">Swap the simulator or environment while keeping the artifact schema unchanged.</li><li amzn-src-id="51684">Add a video or state-trace link for the worst failure case.</li><li amzn-src-id="51685">Repeat the run with a second seed panel and report only metrics co-computed in that panel.</li></ul></div>
<div class="kindle-disclosure lab-solution" amzn-src-id="51686"><p class="kindle-disclosure-title" amzn-src-id="51687">Complete Solution Sketch</p><pre amzn-src-id="51688"><code class="language-python" amzn-src-id="51689"><span class="n" amzn-src-id="51690">seeds</span> <span class="o" amzn-src-id="51691">=</span> <span class="p" amzn-src-id="51692">[</span><span class="mi" amzn-src-id="51693">3</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51694">,</span> <span class="mi" amzn-src-id="51695">7</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51696">,</span> <span class="mi" amzn-src-id="51697">11</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51698">,</span> <span class="mi" amzn-src-id="51699">19</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51700">,</span> <span class="mi" amzn-src-id="51701">23</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51702">]</span>
<span class="n" amzn-src-id="51703">records</span> <span class="o" amzn-src-id="51704">=</span> <span class="p" amzn-src-id="51705">[]</span>
<span class="k" amzn-src-id="51706">for</span> <span class="n" amzn-src-id="51707">i</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51708">,</span> <span class="n" amzn-src-id="51709">seed</span> <span class="ow" amzn-src-id="51710">in</span> <span class="nb" amzn-src-id="51711">enumerate</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51712">(</span><span class="n" amzn-src-id="51713">seeds</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51714">):</span>
<span class="n" amzn-src-id="51715">baseline_reward</span> <span class="o" amzn-src-id="51716">=</span> <span class="mf" amzn-src-id="51717">14.0</span> <span class="o" amzn-src-id="51718">+</span> <span class="mf" amzn-src-id="51719">0.7</span> <span class="o" amzn-src-id="51720">*</span> <span class="n" amzn-src-id="51721">i</span>
<span class="n" amzn-src-id="51722">library_reward</span> <span class="o" amzn-src-id="51723">=</span> <span class="n" amzn-src-id="51724">baseline_reward</span> <span class="o" amzn-src-id="51725">+</span> <span class="mf" amzn-src-id="51726">1.3</span>
<span class="n" amzn-src-id="51727">records</span><span class="o" amzn-src-id="51728">.</span><span class="n" amzn-src-id="51729">append</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51730">({</span>
<span class="s2" amzn-src-id="51731">"seed"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51732">:</span> <span class="n" amzn-src-id="51733">seed</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51734">,</span>
<span class="s2" amzn-src-id="51735">"baseline_reward"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51736">:</span> <span class="nb" amzn-src-id="51737">round</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51738">(</span><span class="n" amzn-src-id="51739">baseline_reward</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51740">,</span> <span class="mi" amzn-src-id="51741">2</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51742">),</span>
<span class="s2" amzn-src-id="51743">"library_reward"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51744">:</span> <span class="nb" amzn-src-id="51745">round</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51746">(</span><span class="n" amzn-src-id="51747">library_reward</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51748">,</span> <span class="mi" amzn-src-id="51749">2</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51750">),</span>
<span class="s2" amzn-src-id="51751">"perturbation"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51752">:</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="51753">"120 ms action delay"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51754">,</span>
<span class="s2" amzn-src-id="51755">"failure_label"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51756">:</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="51757">"none"</span> <span class="k" amzn-src-id="51758">if</span> <span class="n" amzn-src-id="51759">i</span> <span class="o" amzn-src-id="51760">&lt;</span> <span class="mi" amzn-src-id="51761">3</span> <span class="k" amzn-src-id="51762">else</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="51763">"late_recovery"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51764">,</span>
<span class="p" amzn-src-id="51765">})</span>
<span class="nb" amzn-src-id="51766">print</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51767">(</span><span class="n" amzn-src-id="51768">records</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="51769">)</span></code></pre></div>
</section>
<div class="whats-next" amzn-src-id="51770"><h3 amzn-src-id="51771">What's Next?</h3><p amzn-src-id="51772">Continue with <a href="ch_0125_part-4-reinforcement-learning-for-embodied-agents-module-15-policy-gradi.xhtml" amzn-src-id="51773">Section 15.1: Direct policy optimization; stochastic policies</a>, where the chapter moves from motivation to the first concrete idea.</p></div>
<p amzn-src-id="51774">This chapter is written for readers who want theory and a working build path in the same pass. Read each section twice: first for the mechanism, then for the artifact you would save if you had to reproduce the result six months later.</p>
<div class="comparison-table" amzn-src-id="51775">
<div class="comparison-table-title" amzn-src-id="51776">Chapter Tool Map</div>
<table amzn-src-id="51777">
<thead amzn-src-id="51778"><tr amzn-src-id="51779"><th amzn-src-id="51780">Tool or Library</th><th amzn-src-id="51781">Where It Pays Off</th></tr></thead>
<tbody amzn-src-id="51782">
<tr amzn-src-id="51783"><td amzn-src-id="51784">Gymnasium</td><td amzn-src-id="51785">Use for a concrete lab, comparison, or extension in this chapter.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="51786"><td amzn-src-id="51787">PettingZoo</td><td amzn-src-id="51788">Use for a concrete lab, comparison, or extension in this chapter.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="51789"><td amzn-src-id="51790">ROS 2</td><td amzn-src-id="51791">Use for a concrete lab, comparison, or extension in this chapter.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="51792"><td amzn-src-id="51793">MuJoCo</td><td amzn-src-id="51794">Use for a concrete lab, comparison, or extension in this chapter.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="51795"><td amzn-src-id="51796">LeRobot</td><td amzn-src-id="51797">Use for a concrete lab, comparison, or extension in this chapter.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
<div class="callout lab" amzn-src-id="51798"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="51799">Chapter Lab Extension</div><p amzn-src-id="51800">Extend the lab by adding one baseline, one maintained-library implementation, and one perturbation test. Save the result as a single folder containing configuration, logs, summary metrics, and two representative failure cases.</p></div>
<section class="production-index-depth-topup" amzn-src-id="51801">
<p amzn-src-id="51802">The chapter can be used as a self-contained reading unit or as the basis for an undergraduate or graduate teaching week. The recommended pattern is concept, minimal implementation, library shortcut, diagnostic exercise, then reflection on failure modes. This keeps the mathematical idea attached to a concrete system artifact rather than letting it float as notation.</p>
<p amzn-src-id="51803">For Policy Gradient Methods and PPO, the practical stack should be introduced as a set of choices rather than a shopping list. The relevant tools include Gymnasium, PettingZoo, ROS 2, MuJoCo, LeRobot. Each tool earns its place only when it shortens a working path, improves reproducibility, or exposes a standard interface that readers will meet in real embodied systems.</p>
<div class="callout self-check" amzn-src-id="51804"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="51805">Readiness Check</div><p amzn-src-id="51806">Before leaving the chapter, the reader should be able to state one theory claim, one implementation claim, one evaluation claim, and one realistic failure mode. If any of those four are missing, the chapter should be revisited through the lab.</p></div>
<div class="callout key-takeaway" amzn-src-id="51807"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="51808">Teaching Takeaway</div><p amzn-src-id="51809">A strong chapter session ends with an artifact: a small script, a plotted trace, a simulator run, a data card, or a reproducible evaluation panel. The artifact is what turns reading into embodied-system-building practice.</p></div>
</section>
<section class="bibliography" amzn-src-id="51810">
<h2 amzn-src-id="51811">Bibliography &amp; Further Reading</h2>
<h3 amzn-src-id="51812">Foundational Papers, Tools, and References</h3>
<div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="51813">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="51814">Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G.. "Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction." (2018). <a href="http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html" amzn-src-id="51815">http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="51816">A foundation for value functions, policy gradients, exploration, and the RL framing used throughout the book.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="51817">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="51818">Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y.. "MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control." (2012). <a href="https://mujoco.org/" amzn-src-id="51819">https://mujoco.org/</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="51820">The simulator lineage behind much modern robot learning, now extended through MJX and Warp workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="51821">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="51822">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-1: Robotics Transformer for real-world control at scale." (2022). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817" amzn-src-id="51823">https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="51824">A landmark in large-scale robot policy learning with transformer policies.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="51825">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="51826">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818" amzn-src-id="51827">https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="51828">A central reference for connecting web-scale VLM knowledge to robot actions.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="51829">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="51830">Open X-Embodiment Collaboration. "Open X-Embodiment: Robotic Learning Datasets and RT-X Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864" amzn-src-id="51831">https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="51832">The cross-embodiment data and transfer reference used by the data chapters.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="51833">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="51834">Chi, C. et al.. "Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137" amzn-src-id="51835">https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="51836">The practical diffusion policy reference for imitation learning and continuous action generation.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="51837">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="51838">Hafner, D. et al.. "Mastering Diverse Domains through World Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104" amzn-src-id="51839">https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="51840">DreamerV3, a modern reference for latent world models and imagination-based control.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="51841">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="51842">Hugging Face. "LeRobot." (2024). <a href="https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot" amzn-src-id="51843">https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="51844">The open robot-learning stack used for datasets, policies, demos, and low-cost embodied AI workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="51845">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="51846">Achiam, J. (2018). Spinning Up in Deep RL. OpenAI. <a href="https://spinningup.openai.com/" amzn-src-id="51847">https://spinningup.openai.com/</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="51848">A practical introduction to deep RL algorithms including VPG, TRPO, and PPO, with clean single-file implementations. The policy gradient section explains the log-probability trick, baseline subtraction, and advantage normalization in the same sequence used in this chapter. Compare the SpinningUp PPO code against CleanRL's single-file version to see which implementation details each author considered load-bearing.</p>
</div>
</section>




</body>
</html>
