<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en" amzn-src-id="1255">
  <head amzn-src-id="1256">
    <title amzn-src-id="1257">Who Should Read This Book</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="1258" />
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="1259" />
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="1260" />
  </head>
  <body amzn-src-id="1261">
<h1 amzn-src-id="1262">Who Should Read This Book</h1>

<div class="callout big-picture" amzn-src-id="1263">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="1264">Big Picture</div>
<p amzn-src-id="1265">This is a book for <strong amzn-src-id="1266">practitioners who build embodied systems</strong> and <strong amzn-src-id="1267">researchers who study them</strong>. It is written for the engineer shipping policies onto real robots and for the scientist pushing the frontier, at a density either will respect. It would rather show the equation, the algorithm, and the maintained tool than re-derive prerequisites you already have.</p>
</div>
<h2 amzn-src-id="1268">Who You Are</h2>
<p amzn-src-id="1269">The book has a few concrete readers in mind.</p>
<ul amzn-src-id="1270">
<li amzn-src-id="1271"><strong amzn-src-id="1272">Robot-learning engineers</strong> training policies with RL or imitation, wiring up simulators, and fighting the sim-to-real gap on real hardware.</li>
<li amzn-src-id="1273"><strong amzn-src-id="1274">Controls and robotics engineers</strong> moving into learning-based methods, who know kinematics, dynamics, and feedback control and want to add data-driven policies, world models, and VLAs to that foundation.</li>
<li amzn-src-id="1275"><strong amzn-src-id="1276">Machine learning researchers entering embodied AI</strong> from vision, language, or generative modeling, who are fluent in deep learning but new to the closed loop, partial observability, and irreversible consequences.</li>
<li amzn-src-id="1277"><strong amzn-src-id="1278">Autonomy teams</strong> in manipulation, locomotion, aerial, underwater, or driving, who need one coherent account of the modern stack instead of scattered papers and vendor docs.</li>
</ul>
<div class="callout note" amzn-src-id="1279">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="1280">Assumed Background</div>
<p amzn-src-id="1281">The book assumes fluency with <strong amzn-src-id="1282">Python</strong>, comfort with <strong amzn-src-id="1283">tensors</strong> and array programming (NumPy and PyTorch or JAX), working <strong amzn-src-id="1284">probability</strong> (distributions, expectation, conditioning, basic estimation), and the <strong amzn-src-id="1285">basics of deep learning</strong> (gradients, backpropagation, training loops, common architectures). It also assumes you can read pseudocode and turn an algorithm into running code. Where a chapter leans on linear algebra, 3D geometry, probability and estimation, optimization, or PyTorch and JAX mechanics, it points to the appendices (A through D) for a focused refresher rather than re-teaching the material in the main text.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout warning" amzn-src-id="1286">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="1287">What This Book Is Not</div>
<p amzn-src-id="1288">This is not a gentle introduction. If you are new to programming, or are meeting machine learning and deep learning for the first time, start with a foundational course or an earlier volume in the Hands-On AI Science series and return when the prerequisites above feel routine. The prior promise of self-contained undergraduate teaching has been retired: prerequisite material is assumed and refreshed only in the appendices, not built up from zero in the chapters. The payoff for that assumption is depth; the chapters spend their pages on the real mechanisms, the maintained tools, and the failure modes that actually occur, rather than on re-deriving what you already know.</p>
</div>




</body>
</html>
