<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en" amzn-src-id="135950">
  <head amzn-src-id="135951">
    <title amzn-src-id="135952">Part X: Multi-Agent and Human-Centered Embodiment</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="135953" />
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="135954" />
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="135955" />
  </head>
  <body amzn-src-id="135956">
<h1 amzn-src-id="135957">Part X: Multi-Agent and Human-Centered Embodiment</h1>

<div class="part-overview" amzn-src-id="135958">
<h2 amzn-src-id="135959">Part Overview</h2>
<p amzn-src-id="135960">This part studies embodied systems that must coordinate with other agents, work around people, and keep adapting after deployment. It connects multi-agent coordination, human-robot interaction, shared autonomy, open-world evaluation, lifelong learning, safety logging, and human-study design into one production layer.</p>
<p amzn-src-id="135961">Chapters: 3. Each chapter includes theory, recipes, practical code, a library shortcut, human-centered diagnostics, logging guidance, labs, and exercises.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout big-picture" amzn-src-id="135962">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="135963">Why This Part Matters</div>
<p amzn-src-id="135964">Multi-Agent and Human-Centered Embodiment gives the reader the coordination layer of the embodied AI stack. Later chapters assume that agents can share observations, communicate intent, ask people for help, adapt to novelty, and leave audit trails when the world changes.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout key-insight" id="part-x-coordination-contract" amzn-src-id="135965">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="135966">Part X Coordination Contract</div>
<p amzn-src-id="135967">Across the three chapters, the same evidence pattern repeats: define the agents or people in the loop, state what each can observe and control, log every handoff or adaptation event, and compare methods on one shared panel. That contract keeps coordination, HRI, and lifelong learning from becoming disconnected anecdotes.</p>
</div>
<div class="comparison-table" amzn-src-id="135968">
<div class="comparison-table-title" amzn-src-id="135969">Part X Evidence Spine</div>
<table amzn-src-id="135970">
<thead amzn-src-id="135971"><tr amzn-src-id="135972"><th amzn-src-id="135973">Chapter</th><th amzn-src-id="135974">Primary Evidence</th><th amzn-src-id="135975">Failure Mode To Log</th></tr></thead>
<tbody amzn-src-id="135976">
<tr amzn-src-id="135977"><td amzn-src-id="135978">49</td><td amzn-src-id="135979">Team metrics, per-agent observations, messages, and task allocation decisions</td><td amzn-src-id="135980">Deadlock, role collapse, stale shared belief, or hidden single-agent dependence</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="135981"><td amzn-src-id="135982">50</td><td amzn-src-id="135983">Human command, robot explanation, autonomy state, intervention, and trust signal</td><td amzn-src-id="135984">Misread intent, overtrust, unclear handoff, privacy issue, or unsafe social motion</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="135985"><td amzn-src-id="135986">51</td><td amzn-src-id="135987">Novelty type, memory retrieval, adaptation event, retention score, and rollback rule</td><td amzn-src-id="135988">Forgetting, stale memory, unsafe adaptation, or mixed-config evaluation</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
<div class="chapter-card" amzn-src-id="135989">
<div class="chapter-card-header" amzn-src-id="135990"><a href="ch_0375_part-10-multi-agent-and-human-centered-embodiment-module-49-multi-agent-.xhtml" amzn-src-id="135991"><span class="mod-num" amzn-src-id="135992">Chapter 49</span> Multi-Agent Embodied AI</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body" amzn-src-id="135993"><p amzn-src-id="135994">This chapter develops multi-agent embodied ai as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list" amzn-src-id="135995"><li amzn-src-id="135996"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="135997">49.1</span> One agent vs. many</li><li amzn-src-id="135998"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="135999">49.2</span> Cooperation, competition, communication</li><li amzn-src-id="136000"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136001">49.3</span> Shared perception and task allocation</li><li amzn-src-id="136002"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136003">49.4</span> Multi-agent RL (with PettingZoo)</li><li amzn-src-id="136004"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136005">49.5</span> Swarms and emergent behavior; evaluating teams</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card" amzn-src-id="136006">
<div class="chapter-card-header" amzn-src-id="136007"><a href="ch_0381_part-10-multi-agent-and-human-centered-embodiment-module-50-human-robot-.xhtml" amzn-src-id="136008"><span class="mod-num" amzn-src-id="136009">Chapter 50</span> Human-Robot Interaction</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body" amzn-src-id="136010"><p amzn-src-id="136011">This chapter develops human-robot interaction as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list" amzn-src-id="136012"><li amzn-src-id="136013"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136014">50.1</span> Robots among humans</li><li amzn-src-id="136015"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136016">50.2</span> Natural-language interaction and social navigation</li><li amzn-src-id="136017"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136018">50.3</span> Intent recognition and trust calibration</li><li amzn-src-id="136019"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136020">50.4</span> Explainable robot behavior</li><li amzn-src-id="136021"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136022">50.5</span> Human feedback and shared autonomy</li><li amzn-src-id="136023"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136024">50.6</span> Ethical concerns</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card" amzn-src-id="136025">
<div class="chapter-card-header" amzn-src-id="136026"><a href="ch_0388_part-10-multi-agent-and-human-centered-embodiment-module-51-open-world-a.xhtml" amzn-src-id="136027"><span class="mod-num" amzn-src-id="136028">Chapter 51</span> Open-World and Novelty-Robust Embodiment</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body" amzn-src-id="136029"><p amzn-src-id="136030">This chapter develops open-world and novelty-robust embodiment as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list" amzn-src-id="136031"><li amzn-src-id="136032"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136033">51.1</span> Closed- vs. open-world tasks</li><li amzn-src-id="136034"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136035">51.2</span> Novel objects and instructions; changing environments</li><li amzn-src-id="136036"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136037">51.3</span> Long-horizon tasks</li><li amzn-src-id="136038"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136039">51.4</span> Distribution shift triggers and open-world adaptation</li><li amzn-src-id="136040"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="136041">51.5</span> Novelty detection and retraining triggers; open-world evaluation</li></ul></div>
</div>
<div class="whats-next" amzn-src-id="136042"><h3 amzn-src-id="136043">What's Next?</h3><p amzn-src-id="136044">After this part, <a href="ch_0394_part-11-evaluation-safety-robustness-and-deployment-index.xhtml" amzn-src-id="136045">Part XI: Evaluation, Safety, Robustness, and Deployment extends the stack</a>.</p></div>
<nav class="landing-nav" amzn-src-id="136046">Table of ContentsBuilding Embodied AIFrom Perception to Autonomous Ac...<a class="next" href="ch_0394_part-11-evaluation-safety-robustness-and-deployment-index.xhtml" amzn-src-id="136047">Part XI: Evaluation, Safety, Robustness, and Deployment</a></nav>



</body>
</html>
