<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>About the Hands-On AI Science Series</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><a class="skip-link" href="#main-content">Skip to main content</a>
<header class="chapter-header">
<nav class="header-nav">
Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action
<span class="toc-icon">☰</span> Contents
</nav>

<div class="page-breadcrumb"><span class="bc-current">Front Matter</span></div>
<h1>About the Hands-On AI Science Series</h1>
</header>
<main class="content" id="main-content">
<p><em>Building Embodied AI</em> is part of <strong>Hands-On AI Science</strong>, a series that pairs serious depth with serious building.</p>
<p>Most AI books pick a side. Some are reference manuals for an API or a library: useful for a season, but quiet about why anything works. Others are theory texts you admire but rarely run. Hands-On AI Science was created to be both at once: the science and the build, in one connected story.</p>
<p>Each book in the series takes a major field of AI and develops it from first principles to the current research frontier. It treats the subject at graduate depth, with a real dive into the theories, models, internals, and assumptions. Then it makes the reader build. Core ideas appear first in small from-scratch implementations that expose the mechanism, then again through the modern libraries and tools that make the method practical.</p>
<div class="callout key-insight">
<div class="callout-title">What Hands-On AI Science Promises</div>
<p>It is hands-on: every major idea becomes something the reader can run, test, modify, or deploy. It is science: it explains why the method works, what assumptions it needs, and where it fails. It is AI: it connects classical foundations to frontier systems without hiding either side.</p>
</div>
<p>Depth need not be dense. The series explains in plain language and leans on illustrations, analogies, mental models, worked examples, code captions, self-checks, and labs. Next to the science you will find implementation recipes, engineering tradeoffs, case studies, failure modes, and the tooling advice that decides whether a method survives contact with real data, real compute, or real deployment constraints.</p>
<p>Each volume is self-contained and structured to support a full undergraduate or graduate course, a focused seminar, or a serious self-study path. The books are written for readers who want the confidence that comes from understanding the mechanism and the fluency that comes from using the right tools.</p>
<h2>The Books in the Series</h2>
<ul>
<li><strong>Building Language AI</strong>: From Tokens to Agents. <a href="https://llmbook.apartsin.com" rel="noopener" target="_blank">llmbook.apartsin.com</a> · <a href="https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0H1MQH23D" rel="noopener" target="_blank">Kindle</a></li>
<li><strong>Building Vision AI</strong>: From Pixels to Generative Models. <a href="https://visionbook.apartsin.com" rel="noopener" target="_blank">visionbook.apartsin.com</a> · <a href="https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0H5BT8Y75" rel="noopener" target="_blank">Kindle</a></li>
<li><strong>Building Temporal AI</strong>: From Forecasting to Sequential Decision Making. <a href="https://temporalbook.apartsin.com" rel="noopener" target="_blank">temporalbook.apartsin.com</a> · <a href="https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0H5KRJFCD" rel="noopener" target="_blank">Kindle</a></li>
<li><strong>Building Scalable AI</strong>: From Big Data Algorithms to Distributed Intelligence. <a href="https://scalablebook.apartsin.com" rel="noopener" target="_blank">scalablebook.apartsin.com</a> · <a href="https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0H5Q1471R" rel="noopener" target="_blank">Kindle</a></li>
<li><strong>Building Embodied AI</strong>: From Perception to Autonomous Action. <em>You are reading it.</em> embodiedbook.apartsin.com</li>
<li><strong>Building Agentic AI</strong>: From Goals to Autonomous Systems. <a href="https://agenticbook.apartsin.com" rel="noopener" target="_blank">agenticbook.apartsin.com</a></li>
<li><strong>Building Discovery AI</strong>: From Vibe Coding to Autonomous Science. <a href="https://discoverybook.apartsin.com" rel="noopener" target="_blank">discoverybook.apartsin.com</a></li>
<li><strong>Building Neuromorphic AI</strong>: From Spiking Neurons to Edge Intelligence. <a href="https://neuromorphicbook.apartsin.com" rel="noopener" target="_blank">neuromorphicbook.apartsin.com</a></li>
<li><strong>Building Quantum AI</strong>: From Qubits to Quantum Machine Learning. <a href="https://quantumbook.apartsin.com" rel="noopener" target="_blank">quantumbook.apartsin.com</a></li>
</ul>
<h2>Where This Volume Fits</h2>
<p><em>Building Embodied AI</em> is the fifth volume, and it is the bridge from models that process data to systems that act in the world. It asks what changes when intelligence must observe, move, touch, plan, fail safely, recover, and learn from consequences.</p>
<p>The book connects perception, geometry, control, reinforcement learning, imitation learning, simulation, robot data, world models, language-guided agents, VLA policies, manipulation, locomotion, evaluation, safety, and deployment as parts of one closed loop. That is the embodied turn: prediction is no longer the endpoint. It becomes one component inside action.</p>
<div class="callout big-picture">
<div class="callout-title">Big Picture: Why Embodiment Changes AI</div>
<p>Language AI teaches systems to use symbols. Vision AI teaches systems to interpret pixels and scenes. Temporal AI teaches systems to reason through sequences and decisions. Scalable AI teaches systems to survive scale. Embodied AI asks those abilities to meet physics, time, uncertainty, safety, and consequence.</p>
</div>
<p>That is why this volume is both a robotics book for AI readers and an AI book for robotics readers. It supplies the mathematical and engineering foundations, then keeps returning to a practical question: what would it take to build the system, test it, debug it, and trust it outside a static benchmark?</p>
<nav class="chapter-nav">
<a class="prev" href="ch_0000_front-matter-about-authors.xhtml">About the Authors</a>
Table of Contents
<a class="next" href="ch_0006_front-matter-fm-who-should-read.xhtml">Who Should Read This Book</a>
</nav>
<footer>
<p class="footer-title">Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action, Second Edition</p>
<p>© 2026 Alexander Apartsin &amp; Yehudit Aperstein · Contents</p>
<p class="footer-updated">Last updated: </p>
</footer>
</main>

</body>
</html>
