<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Part V: Learning from Demonstration and Robot Data</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><a class="skip-link" href="#main-content">Skip to main content</a>
<header class="chapter-header">
<nav class="header-nav">
Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action
<span class="toc-icon">☰</span> Contents
</nav>

<div class="part-label">Book Part</div>
<div class="chapter-label">Part V</div>
<h1>Part V: Learning from Demonstration and Robot Data</h1>
</header>
<main class="content" id="main-content">
<div class="part-overview">
<h2>Part Overview</h2>
<p>This part covers a coherent segment of the embodied AI stack. It connects formal ideas with the tools and labs needed to build working systems.</p>
<p>Chapters: 6. Each chapter includes theory, recipes, practical code, a library shortcut, and exercises.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout big-picture">
<div class="callout-title">Why This Part Matters</div>
<p>Learning from Demonstration and Robot Data gives the reader a working layer of the embodied AI stack. Later chapters assume this layer when agents must perceive, plan, act, and recover from mistakes.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0162_part-5-learning-from-demonstration-and-robot-data-module-21-imitation-le.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 21</span> Imitation Learning</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops imitation learning as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">21.1</span> Why learning from demonstration matters for robots</li><li><span class="sec-num">21.2</span> Behavior cloning; the distribution-shift problem</li><li><span class="sec-num">21.3</span> DAgger and dataset aggregation</li><li><span class="sec-num">21.4</span> Inverse reinforcement learning</li><li><span class="sec-num">21.5</span> Sources of demonstrations: humans, planners, foundation models</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0168_part-5-learning-from-demonstration-and-robot-data-module-22-action-chunk.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 22</span> Action Chunking and Diffusion Policies</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops action chunking and diffusion policies as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">22.1</span> Why single-step prediction fails on real manipulation</li><li><span class="sec-num">22.2</span> ACT (Action Chunking Transformer) and the cVAE formulation</li><li><span class="sec-num">22.3</span> ALOHA, ALOHA 2, and Mobile ALOHA</li><li><span class="sec-num">22.4</span> Diffusion Policy: action generation by denoising</li><li><span class="sec-num">22.5</span> Flow matching for actions</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0176_part-5-learning-from-demonstration-and-robot-data-module-23-teleoperatio.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 23</span> Teleoperation and Data Collection</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops teleoperation and data collection as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">23.1</span> Why data is the bottleneck</li><li><span class="sec-num">23.2</span> Leader-follower teleoperation (ALOHA, GELLO)</li><li><span class="sec-num">23.3</span> Handheld and in-the-wild collection (UMI)</li><li><span class="sec-num">23.4</span> Immersive/VR teleoperation (Open-TeleVision)</li><li><span class="sec-num">23.5</span> Data quality, diversity, and labeling</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0183_part-5-learning-from-demonstration-and-robot-data-module-24-robot-datase.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 24</span> Robot Datasets and Data Scaling Laws</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops robot datasets and data scaling laws as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">24.1</span> The major datasets: Open X-Embodiment, DROID, BridgeData V2, RH20T, RoboMIND, AgiBot World</li><li><span class="sec-num">24.2</span> Dataset structure, embodiment metadata, and licensing</li><li><span class="sec-num">24.3</span> Cross-embodiment pooling</li><li><span class="sec-num">24.4</span> Empirical data scaling laws in imitation learning</li><li><span class="sec-num">24.5</span> Curating and mixing data</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0189_part-5-learning-from-demonstration-and-robot-data-module-25-offline-rl-a.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 25</span> Offline RL and Dataset-Based Robot Learning</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops offline rl and dataset-based robot learning as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">25.1</span> Learning without online interaction</li><li><span class="sec-num">25.2</span> Distribution shift and extrapolation error</li><li><span class="sec-num">25.3</span> Conservative methods (CQL, IQL) and their intuition</li><li><span class="sec-num">25.4</span> Offline-to-online fine-tuning</li><li><span class="sec-num">25.5</span> Evaluating offline policies rigorously</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0195_part-5-learning-from-demonstration-and-robot-data-module-26-skills-hiera.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 26</span> Skills, Hierarchy, and Task Decomposition</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops skills, hierarchy, and task decomposition as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">26.1</span> What a skill is; low- vs. high-level actions</li><li><span class="sec-num">26.2</span> The options framework</li><li><span class="sec-num">26.3</span> Skill discovery and hierarchical RL</li><li><span class="sec-num">26.4</span> Language as a high-level controller</li><li><span class="sec-num">26.5</span> Skill libraries for embodied agents</li></ul></div>
</div>
<div class="whats-next"><h3>What's Next?</h3><p>After this part, <a href="ch_0201_part-6-embodied-perception-index.xhtml">Part VI: Embodied Perception extends the stack</a>.</p></div>
<nav class="landing-nav">Table of ContentsBuilding Embodied AIFrom Perception to Autonomous Ac...<a class="next" href="ch_0201_part-6-embodied-perception-index.xhtml">Part VI: Embodied Perception</a></nav>
<footer>
<p class="footer-title">Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action, Web Edition</p>
<p>© 2026 Alexander Apartsin &amp; Yehudit Aperstein · Contents</p>
<p class="footer-updated">Last updated: </p>
</footer>
</main>

</body>
</html>
