<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Foreword</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><a class="skip-link" href="#main-content">Skip to main content</a>
<header class="chapter-header">
<nav class="header-nav">
Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action
<span class="toc-icon">☰</span> Contents
</nav>

<div class="page-breadcrumb"><span class="bc-current">Front Matter</span></div>
<h1>Foreword</h1>
</header>
<main class="content" id="main-content">
<p>Embodied intelligence begins when an agent's computation is inseparable from its body. The sensors determine what the world looks like; the actuators determine what can be changed; the physics determine what the consequences will be. These three constraints are not engineering inconveniences. They are the subject.</p>
<p>A classifier learns which output is most likely given an input. An embodied agent learns which action is most worth taking given a state that its previous actions helped create, inside a world it cannot fully observe and cannot undo. The difference is not one of scale. It is a difference in the mathematical object being learned, the feedback that drives learning, and the failure modes that actually matter.</p>
<p>This book is one connected journey through the full stack: the geometry and dynamics of bodies in physical space; the simulators that make learning tractable before hardware; the reinforcement and imitation learning algorithms that close the loop; the vision, language, and action models that let agents interpret instructions and generate behavior; the world models that let agents plan before acting; the skills and whole-body control that let humanoids, drones, and manipulators move with purpose; and the safety, evaluation, and deployment practices that turn working code into running systems.</p>
<p>The loop runs from perception to action, from simple simulated agents to modern robot foundation models, and from classical feedback control to cross-embodiment policies trained on millions of robot trajectories. Every part of that arc is here.</p><nav class="chapter-nav">
Building Embodied AIFrom Perception to Autonomous Ac...
Table of Contents
<a class="next" href="ch_0000_front-matter-about-authors.xhtml">About the Authors</a>
</nav>
<footer>
<p class="footer-title">Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action, Second Edition</p>
<p>© 2026 Alexander Apartsin &amp; Yehudit Aperstein · Contents</p>
<p class="footer-updated">Last updated: </p>
</footer>
</main>

</body>
</html>
