<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Application Reader Pathways</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><a class="skip-link" href="#main-content">Skip to main content</a>
<header class="chapter-header">
<nav class="header-nav">
Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action
<span class="toc-icon">☰</span> Contents
</nav>

<div class="page-breadcrumb"><span class="bc-current">Front Matter</span></div>
<h1>Application Reader Pathways</h1>
</header>
<main class="content" id="main-content">
<div class="callout big-picture"><div class="callout-title">Big Picture</div><p>This book can be read front to back, but application builders often need a direct route. Use these pathways when your goal is to build drones, autonomous vehicles, humanoids, mobile manipulators, industrial fleets, VLA systems, simulation-first policies, SLAM systems, safety cases, or research capstones.</p></div>
<p>Each pathway names the chapters to read, the sections to prioritize, and the artifact to produce. The common artifact is always the same: an operating-domain card, a state-action contract, a scenario panel, a safety boundary, a metric artifact, and a replayable failure case.</p>
<div class="comparison-table"><div class="comparison-table-title">Top Application Pathways</div><table><thead><tr><th>Application</th><th>Primary Chapters</th><th>Build Artifact</th></tr></thead><tbody>
<tr><td>Humanoid robots</td><td>5, 7, 8, 20, 21, 35, 45, 46, 54</td><td>Whole-body control trial with contact schedule and safety monitor.</td></tr>
<tr><td>Drones and aerial robots</td><td>8, 11, 13, 20, 29, 30, 47, 54</td><td>PX4 evidence ladder from SITL to flight log review.</td></tr>
<tr><td>Autonomous vehicles</td><td>5, 8, 13, 30, 36, 48, 52, 54</td><td>Closed-loop scenario panel with ODD and safety-case defeaters.</td></tr>
<tr><td>Mobile manipulation</td><td>30, 31, 34, 35, 42, 43, 44, 50</td><td>Route, reachability, grasp, and recovery task card.</td></tr>
<tr><td>Industrial fleets</td><td>30, 49, 52, 54, 55, 59</td><td>Fleet dashboard with throughput, interventions, congestion, and incidents.</td></tr>
<tr><td>VLA and robot foundation models</td><td>21, 25, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 58</td><td>Fine-tuning and serving card with calibration, latency, and rollback.</td></tr>
<tr><td>Simulation-first robot learning</td><td>9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 20, 36, 59</td><td>Sim-to-hardware reproducibility card with failure replay.</td></tr>
<tr><td>SLAM and navigation systems</td><td>27, 28, 29, 30, 47</td><td>Mapping and navigation manifest with degraded-sensing perturbations.</td></tr>
<tr><td>Safety-critical embodied AI</td><td>52, 53, 54, 55</td><td>Assurance argument with claims, evidence, defeaters, and residual risk.</td></tr>
<tr><td>Research platforms and capstones</td><td>56, 57, 58, 59, 60</td><td>Application-track capstone with reproducible metric artifact.</td></tr>
</tbody></table></div>
<div class="callout key-insight"><div class="callout-title">One Pattern, Many Bodies</div><p>The robot body changes the math and tools, but the engineering proof remains stable: define the domain, expose the interface, test the scenario panel, save the evidence, and explain the failure.</p></div>
<div class="callout practical-example"><div class="callout-title">How To Use The Map</div><p>A drone builder can start with Chapters 8, 29, 30, and 47, then use Chapter 54 for operational risk. A VLA builder can start with Chapters 21, 34, and 35, then use Chapter 55 for serving and Chapter 59 for a capstone template.</p></div>
<nav class="chapter-nav">
<a class="prev" href="ch_0008_front-matter-look-inside-preview.xhtml">Look Inside Preview</a>
Table of Contents
<a class="next" href="ch_0003_front-matter-copyright.xhtml">Copyright and Legal</a>
</nav>
<footer>
<p class="footer-title">Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action, Second Edition</p>
<p>© 2026 Alexander Apartsin &amp; Yehudit Aperstein · Contents</p>
<p class="footer-updated">Last updated: </p>
</footer>
</main>

</body>
</html>
