<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Part VIII: World Models and Model-Based Embodied AI</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
<h1>Part VIII: World Models and Model-Based Embodied AI</h1>

<div class="part-overview">
<h2>Part Overview</h2>
<p>This part turns world models from a slogan into an engineering contract. A useful world model predicts something that changes action: a future state, a latent consequence, a controllable video rollout, a representation-space target, or a generated trajectory that can be scored before the robot moves.</p>
<p>The six chapters form a progression: prediction first, then model-based reinforcement learning and MPC, then latent dynamics, then generative video worlds, then JEPA-style predictive representations, then diffusion planning. Each chapter now pairs the mechanism with a same-panel evaluation habit: baseline and candidate share the same configuration, seed panel, split, horizon, metric definition, and saved artifact.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout big-picture">
<div class="callout-title">Why This Part Matters</div>
<p>World Models and Model-Based Embodied AI gives the reader the layer that lets an embodied agent think before acting. Later chapters assume this layer when manipulation, locomotion, driving, safety, and deployment systems must predict consequences, plan under uncertainty, and recover from mistakes.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout key-insight">
<div class="callout-title">Part VIII Evidence Standard</div>
<p>Do not compare a prediction score from one run with a control score from another run. In this part, construct-matched metrics are co-computed in one pass on one configuration so the reader can audit each number against the same model, split, seed panel, and artifact.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0280_part-8-world-models-and-model-based-embodied-ai-module-36-predicting-the.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 36</span> Predicting the Future</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter makes prediction operational: what is predicted, over which horizon, with which uncertainty, and for which downstream action.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">36.1</span> Why agents need to predict</li><li><span class="sec-num">36.2</span> Forward/dynamics models; state vs. observation prediction</li><li><span class="sec-num">36.3</span> Error accumulation and horizon</li><li><span class="sec-num">36.4</span> Uncertainty in prediction</li><li><span class="sec-num">36.5</span> Planning with predicted futures</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0286_part-8-world-models-and-model-based-embodied-ai-module-37-model-based-rl.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 37</span> Model-Based RL and MPC</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter connects learned dynamics to receding-horizon control, including ensembles, CEM, MPPI, imagination rollouts, sample efficiency, and failure modes.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">37.1</span> Model-free vs. model-based trade-offs</li><li><span class="sec-num">37.2</span> Learning dynamics models; ensembles and uncertainty</li><li><span class="sec-num">37.3</span> Planning with learned models; MPC and CEM/MPPI</li><li><span class="sec-num">37.4</span> Imagination rollouts</li><li><span class="sec-num">37.5</span> Sample-efficiency advantages and failure modes</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0292_part-8-world-models-and-model-based-embodied-ai-module-38-latent-world-m.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 38</span> Latent World Models</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter shows why action-relevant latent states can be more useful than pixel-perfect prediction, with DreamerV3, IRIS, and TD-MPC2 as anchors.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">38.1</span> Why predict in latent space</li><li><span class="sec-num">38.2</span> Autoencoders and recurrent state-space models (RSSM)</li><li><span class="sec-num">38.3</span> Dreamer to DreamerV3</li><li><span class="sec-num">38.4</span> Transformer world models (IRIS)</li><li><span class="sec-num">38.5</span> TD-MPC2: latent MPC at scale</li><li><span class="sec-num">38.6</span> World models for visual control</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0299_part-8-world-models-and-model-based-embodied-ai-module-39-generative-and.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 39</span> Generative and Video World Models</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter treats generative video systems as simulator candidates only when controllability, consistency, horizon, physical plausibility, and reset behavior are measured.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">39.1</span> Generative models as learned simulators</li><li><span class="sec-num">39.2</span> Genie 1-3: interactive, playable world models</li><li><span class="sec-num">39.3</span> Video generation as world simulation: Sora and successors</li><li><span class="sec-num">39.4</span> NVIDIA Cosmos: world foundation models for physical AI</li><li><span class="sec-num">39.5</span> GameNGen and Oasis: neural game engines</li><li><span class="sec-num">39.6</span> Using generative world models for data and evaluation</li><li><span class="sec-num">39.7</span> Evaluating consistency, controllability, and horizon</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0307_part-8-world-models-and-model-based-embodied-ai-module-40-predictive-rep.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 40</span> Predictive Representations and Self-Supervised World Models</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops JEPA-style prediction, from image and video representations to action-conditioned latent planning and robot-control probes.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">40.1</span> Predict in representation space, not pixels: the JEPA idea</li><li><span class="sec-num">40.2</span> I-JEPA and V-JEPA</li><li><span class="sec-num">40.3</span> V-JEPA 2 and action-conditioned latent planning</li><li><span class="sec-num">40.4</span> Self-supervised pretraining for control</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0312_part-8-world-models-and-model-based-embodied-ai-module-41-diffusion-and-.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 41</span> Diffusion and Generative Planning</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter explains diffusion planning as trajectory denoising, then tests it against latency, scoring, generated-experience risk, and closed-loop safety.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">41.1</span> Diffusion models as planners</li><li><span class="sec-num">41.2</span> Diffuser and Decision Diffuser</li><li><span class="sec-num">41.3</span> Generative trajectory planning and scoring</li><li><span class="sec-num">41.4</span> Generating scenes and synthetic experience</li><li><span class="sec-num">41.5</span> Risks of generated experience</li></ul></div>
</div>
<div class="whats-next"><h3>What's Next?</h3><p>After this part, <a href="ch_0318_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-index.xhtml">Part IX: Manipulation, Locomotion, and Embodied Skills extends the stack</a>.</p></div>
<nav class="landing-nav">Table of ContentsBuilding Embodied AIFrom Perception to Autonomous Ac...<a class="next" href="ch_0318_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-index.xhtml">Part IX: Manipulation, Locomotion, and Embodied Skills</a></nav>



</body>
</html>
