<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 30: Navigation and Path Planning</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
<h1>Chapter 30: Navigation and Path Planning</h1>

<blockquote class="epigraph"><p>"A route is a promise. Navigation is what happens when the world does not read the map the same way I did."</p><cite>A Navigating Embodied AI Agent</cite></blockquote>
<div class="callout big-picture"><div class="callout-title">Big Picture</div><p><strong>Navigation and Path Planning</strong> turns perception into action-ready state. Navigation is where perception becomes a commitment. The agent has to choose a route, spend time, avoid contact, and still recover when the world refuses to match the map.</p></div>
<div class="callout key-insight"><div class="callout-title">Remember This Chapter</div><p>The durable test is not whether a model looks impressive. The test is whether it improves a robot's next action while leaving a clear evidence trail for debugging.</p></div>
<div class="overview"><h2>Chapter Overview</h2><p>Chapter 30 develops <strong>Navigation and Path Planning</strong> as a working piece of the embodied AI stack. It connects visual or spatial evidence to state estimates, action choices, visual servoing loops, timing budgets, and failure labels.</p><p>The chapter follows the right-tool rhythm used across the book: build the mechanism once, then move to maintained tools such as NetworkX, NumPy, ROS 2 Nav2, Habitat.</p></div>
<div class="prereqs"><h3>Prerequisites</h3><p>Readers should be comfortable with Python, tensors, coordinate frames, sensor noise, and the perception-action loop. Useful refreshers appear in <a href="ch_0038_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-04-spatial-r.xhtml">Chapter 4</a>, <a href="ch_0070_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-08-sensors-p.xhtml">Chapter 8</a>, and <a href="ch_0110_part-3-simulation-tooling-and-the-modern-stack-module-13-domain-randomiz.xhtml">Chapter 13</a>.</p></div>
<h2>Chapter Roadmap</h2><div class="section-grid"><span class="section-num">30.1</span> <a href="ch_0229_part-6-embodied-perception-module-30-navigation-and-path-planning-sectio.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Navigation as embodied intelligence</span></a><span class="section-desc">navigation combines perception, mapping, planning, control, timing, and recovery.</span><span class="section-num">30.2</span> <a href="ch_0230_part-6-embodied-perception-module-30-navigation-and-path-planning-sectio.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Graph search: BFS, Dijkstra, A*</span></a><span class="section-desc">graph search converts a map into nodes, edges, costs, and a rule for expanding the next state.</span><span class="section-num">30.3</span> <a href="ch_0231_part-6-embodied-perception-module-30-navigation-and-path-planning-sectio.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Sampling-based planning: RRT, RRT*, PRM</span></a><span class="section-desc">sampling-based planners search continuous spaces by growing trees or roadmaps through collision-free samples.</span><span class="section-num">30.4</span> <a href="ch_0232_part-6-embodied-perception-module-30-navigation-and-path-planning-sectio.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Local planning and obstacle avoidance (DWA, potential fields)</span></a><span class="section-desc">local planners translate a global route into immediate velocity commands that respect dynamics and nearby obstacles.</span><span class="section-num">30.5</span> <a href="ch_0233_part-6-embodied-perception-module-30-navigation-and-path-planning-sectio.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Learned navigation policies</span></a><span class="section-desc">learned policies can map observations to actions, but they still need evaluation against classical planners and recovery cases.</span><span class="section-num">30.6</span> <a href="ch_0234_part-6-embodied-perception-module-30-navigation-and-path-planning-sectio.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Language- and image-goal navigation</span></a><span class="section-desc">goal-conditioned navigation turns words or images into a search target that must be grounded in perception and maps.</span><span class="section-num">30.7</span> <a href="ch_0235_part-6-embodied-perception-module-30-navigation-and-path-planning-sectio.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Field Navigation Under Degraded Sensing</span></a><span class="section-desc">Navigation under degraded sensing is a risk-managed control problem: the robot must reason about map confidence, local traversability, fallback policies, and when not to continue.</span></div>
<div class="callout library-shortcut"><div class="callout-title">Tooling Note</div><p>This chapter uses the right-tool principle. The teaching baseline exposes units, frames, uncertainty, and logging. The shortcut stack uses maintained tools to handle optimized kernels, visualization, data formats, simulation hooks, and deployment interfaces.</p></div>
<section class="lab" id="lab-30">
<h2>Hands-On Lab: Build A Navigation and Path Planning Evidence Panel</h2>
<div class="lab-meta"><span class="lab-duration">Duration: about 75 minutes</span><span class="lab-difficulty">Difficulty: Intermediate</span></div>
<div class="lab-objective"><h3>Objective</h3><p>Build a small evidence panel that compares a hand-built baseline with a maintained tool workflow for this chapter.</p></div>
<div class="lab-skills"><h3>What You'll Practice</h3><ul><li>Writing an observation, action, metric, and perturbation contract.</li><li>Building one inspectable baseline before using a library shortcut.</li><li>Logging success, failure labels, latency, and recovery behavior.</li><li>Explaining which result would change a robot action.</li></ul></div>
<div class="lab-prereqs"><h3>Setup</h3><p>Use a Python environment with NumPy. Add chapter-specific tools only after the baseline manifest runs.</p><pre><code class="language-bash"><span class="c1"># Create a small local environment for the chapter lab.</span>
python<span class="w"> </span>-m<span class="w"> </span>pip<span class="w"> </span>install<span class="w"> </span>numpy</code></pre><div class="code-caption">Code Fragment 30.L1 installs NumPy for the chapter evidence manifest before heavier perception tools are added.</div></div>
<div class="lab-steps"><h3>Steps</h3><div class="lab-step"><h4>Step 1: Define The Contract</h4><p>Write observation, action, metric, and perturbation fields for two sections.</p></div><div class="lab-step"><h4>Step 2: Run The Baseline Manifest</h4><p>Create one comparable row per section, then fill realistic values from the section text.</p><pre><code class="language-python"><span class="c1"># Start a Chapter 30 evidence manifest.</span>
<span class="c1"># Add one row per section and keep metrics construct matched.</span>
<span class="n">sections</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="p">[</span><span class="s1">'30.1'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'30.2'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'30.3'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'30.4'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'30.5'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'30.6'</span><span class="p">]</span>
<span class="n">manifest</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="p">[</span>
<span class="p">{</span><span class="s2">"section"</span><span class="p">:</span> <span class="n">s</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s2">"metric"</span><span class="p">:</span> <span class="s2">"closed_loop_success"</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s2">"perturbation"</span><span class="p">:</span> <span class="s2">"occlusion_or_noise"</span><span class="p">}</span>
<span class="k">for</span> <span class="n">s</span> <span class="ow">in</span> <span class="n">sections</span>
<span class="p">]</span>
<span class="nb">print</span><span class="p">(</span><span class="n">manifest</span><span class="p">[</span><span class="mi">0</span><span class="p">])</span></code></pre><div class="code-caption">Code Fragment 30.L2 creates `manifest` rows for Chapter 30, giving each section the same metric and perturbation fields.</div></div><div class="lab-step"><h4>Step 3: Add The Library Shortcut</h4><p>Replace one baseline field with a maintained tool call, while keeping the output schema unchanged.</p></div><div class="lab-step"><h4>Step 4: Run One Perturbation</h4><p>Add occlusion, noise, pose drift, map error, or goal ambiguity. Record whether the action changed.</p></div><div class="lab-step"><h4>Step 5: Write The Postmortem</h4><p>Explain the strongest result, the most informative failure, and the next diagnostic test.</p></div></div>
<div class="lab-expected"><h3>Expected Output</h3><p>A table with one row per tested section, one baseline result, one shortcut result, one perturbation label, and one failure label.</p></div>
<div class="lab-stretch"><h3>Stretch Goals</h3><ul><li>Add a plot of metric versus perturbation strength.</li><li>Run the same manifest in a Habitat-style simulator or ROS 2 bag replay.</li><li>Export two failure cases with enough metadata to reproduce them later.</li></ul></div>
<div class="kindle-disclosure lab-solution"><p class="kindle-disclosure-title">Complete Solution</p><pre><code class="language-python"><span class="c1"># Start a Chapter 30 evidence manifest.</span>
<span class="c1"># Add one row per section and keep metrics construct matched.</span>
<span class="n">sections</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="p">[</span><span class="s1">'30.1'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'30.2'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'30.3'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'30.4'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'30.5'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'30.6'</span><span class="p">]</span>
<span class="n">manifest</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="p">[</span>
<span class="p">{</span><span class="s2">"section"</span><span class="p">:</span> <span class="n">s</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s2">"metric"</span><span class="p">:</span> <span class="s2">"closed_loop_success"</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s2">"perturbation"</span><span class="p">:</span> <span class="s2">"occlusion_or_noise"</span><span class="p">}</span>
<span class="k">for</span> <span class="n">s</span> <span class="ow">in</span> <span class="n">sections</span>
<span class="p">]</span>
<span class="nb">print</span><span class="p">(</span><span class="n">manifest</span><span class="p">[</span><span class="mi">0</span><span class="p">])</span>
<span class="k">for</span> <span class="n">row</span> <span class="ow">in</span> <span class="n">manifest</span><span class="p">:</span>
<span class="n">row</span><span class="p">[</span><span class="s2">"baseline_score"</span><span class="p">]</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="mf">0.72</span>
<span class="n">row</span><span class="p">[</span><span class="s2">"shortcut_score"</span><span class="p">]</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="mf">0.81</span>
<span class="n">row</span><span class="p">[</span><span class="s2">"failure_label"</span><span class="p">]</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="s2">"perception_or_planning_interface"</span>
<span class="nb">print</span><span class="p">(</span><span class="n">manifest</span><span class="p">)</span></code></pre><div class="code-caption">Code Fragment 30.L3 fills the manifest with comparable baseline and shortcut fields for a same-panel chapter lab.</div></div>
</section>
<p>Use this chapter as a complete teaching unit: concept, minimal implementation, library shortcut, diagnostic perturbation, and postmortem. The pattern prevents a perception model from being evaluated in isolation and never tested as part of the agent loop.</p><div class="comparison-table"><div class="comparison-table-title">Chapter Tool Map</div><table><thead><tr><th>Tool or Library</th><th>Where It Pays Off</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>NetworkX</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr><tr><td>NumPy</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr><tr><td>ROS 2 Nav2</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr><tr><td>Habitat</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr><tr><td>PyTorch</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr><tr><td>OpenCV</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr><tr><td>Open3D</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr></tbody></table></div><div class="callout self-check"><div class="callout-title">Readiness Check</div><p>Before leaving the chapter, the reader should be able to state one theory claim, one implementation claim, one evaluation claim, and one realistic failure mode.</p></div><div class="callout key-takeaway"><div class="callout-title">Teaching Takeaway</div><p>A strong chapter session ends with an artifact: a script, trace, simulator run, data card, map, or reproducible evaluation panel.</p></div>
<div class="whats-next"><h3>What's Next?</h3><p>Start with <a href="ch_0229_part-6-embodied-perception-module-30-navigation-and-path-planning-sectio.xhtml">Section 30.1: Navigation as embodied intelligence</a>. After this chapter, continue to <a href="ch_0237_part-7-language-vision-and-action-module-31-language-guided-embodied-age.xhtml">Chapter 31: Language-Guided Embodied Agents</a>.</p></div>
<section class="bibliography"><h2>Bibliography &amp; Further Reading</h2><h3>Foundational Papers, Tools, and References</h3><div class="bib-entry-card"><p class="bib-ref">LaValle, S. M.. "Planning Algorithms." Cambridge University Press, 2006. <a href="http://lavalle.pl/planning/">http://lavalle.pl/planning/</a></p><p class="bib-annotation">The classic open reference for graph search, sampling-based planning, and configuration spaces.</p></div><div class="bib-entry-card"><p class="bib-ref">Macenski, S. et al.. "Robot Operating System 2: Design, architecture, and uses in the wild." Science Robotics, 2022. <a href="https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/scirobotics.abm6074">https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/scirobotics.abm6074</a></p><p class="bib-annotation">Context for ROS 2 and the deployed robotics middleware surrounding navigation stacks.</p></div><div class="bib-entry-card"><p class="bib-ref">Savva, M. et al.. "Habitat: A Platform for Embodied AI Research." ICCV, 2019. <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.01201">https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.01201</a></p><p class="bib-annotation">A common simulator reference for embodied navigation workflows and benchmark tasks.</p></div><div class="bib-entry-card"><p class="bib-ref">ROS 2 Navigation. "Nav2 documentation." Project documentation. <a href="https://navigation.ros.org/">https://navigation.ros.org/</a></p><p class="bib-annotation">The practical reference for global planning, local control, costmaps, behavior trees, and recovery behaviors.</p></div></section>




</body>
</html>
