<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Part XII: Frontiers, Capstones, and Course Design</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
<h1>Part XII: Frontiers, Capstones, and Course Design</h1>

<div class="part-overview">
<h2>Part Overview</h2>
<p>This part covers memory, continual learning, open problems, capstone projects, and teaching paths. It connects formal ideas with the tools and labs needed to build working systems.</p>
<p>Chapters: 5. Each chapter includes theory, recipes, practical code, a library shortcut, and exercises.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout big-picture">
<div class="callout-title">Why This Part Matters</div>
<p>Frontiers, Capstones, and Course Design gives the reader a working layer of the embodied AI stack. Later chapters assume this layer when agents must perceive, plan, act, and recover from mistakes.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0423_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-56-embodied-agents-.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 56</span> Embodied Agents with Memory</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops embodied agents with memory as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">56.1</span> Why memory matters; short- vs. long-term</li><li><span class="sec-num">56.2</span> Spatial, episodic, and semantic memory</li><li><span class="sec-num">56.3</span> Memory retrieval for planning</li><li><span class="sec-num">56.4</span> Memory errors</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0428_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-57-continual-and-li.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 57</span> Continual and Lifelong Learning</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops continual and lifelong learning as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">57.1</span> Learning after deployment</li><li><span class="sec-num">57.2</span> Catastrophic forgetting and mitigation</li><li><span class="sec-num">57.3</span> Online adaptation; human correction as data</li><li><span class="sec-num">57.4</span> Safe continual learning; evaluation over time</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0433_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-58-frontier-and-ope.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 58</span> Frontier and Open Problems</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops frontier and open problems as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">58.1</span> Scaling laws and data engines for robots</li><li><span class="sec-num">58.2</span> Generalist vs. specialist policies</li><li><span class="sec-num">58.3</span> World models in the robot loop</li><li><span class="sec-num">58.4</span> The open-vs-closed model divide</li><li><span class="sec-num">58.5</span> What is still unsolved (long-horizon reasoning, reliability, real-world RL)</li><li><span class="sec-num">58.6</span> <a href="ch_0439_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-58-frontier-and-ope.xhtml">Frontier Watch</a></li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0440_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 59</span> Capstone Projects</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops capstone projects as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">59.1</span> Object search in a simulated home</li><li><span class="sec-num">59.2</span> Language-guided navigation with replanning</li><li><span class="sec-num">59.3</span> Vision-based robotic pick-and-place (IL + RL)</li><li><span class="sec-num">59.4</span> Fine-tune an open VLA on a custom task (LeRobot)</li><li><span class="sec-num">59.5</span> Learned locomotion with sim-to-real analysis</li><li><span class="sec-num">59.6</span> World-model-based planning agent</li><li><span class="sec-num">59.7</span> Safety-shielded embodied agent</li><li><span class="sec-num">59.8</span> LLM-based household task planner</li><li><span class="sec-num">59.9</span> Drone inspection planner</li><li><span class="sec-num">59.10</span> Multi-agent search and rescue</li><li><span class="sec-num">59.11</span> Open-ended research project</li><li><span class="sec-num">59.12</span> Application track capstone templates</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0453_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-60-teaching-with-th.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 60</span> Teaching with This Book</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops teaching with this book as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">60.1</span> One-semester graduate course (14 weeks)</li><li><span class="sec-num">60.2</span> One-semester advanced undergraduate course (lighter theory, more labs)</li><li><span class="sec-num">60.3</span> Two-semester sequence</li><li><span class="sec-num">60.4</span> Research-seminar track</li><li><span class="sec-num">60.5</span> Lab infrastructure and compute budgeting for instructors</li><li><span class="sec-num">60.6</span> <a href="ch_0459_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-60-teaching-with-th.xhtml">Assessment, rubrics, and academic-integrity notes for code assignments</a></li></ul></div>
</div>
<section class="part-xii-production-frame">
<h2>Part XII Production Frame</h2>
<p>Part XII turns the book from a sequence of mechanisms into a set of durable practices. Memory chapters ask what past evidence should be retrieved. Continual-learning chapters ask how deployed systems change without erasing what already works. Frontier chapters ask which claims survive reproducible evaluation. Capstone and teaching chapters convert the whole book into projects, labs, rubrics, and course paths.</p>
<div class="comparison-table">
<div class="comparison-table-title">Part XII Reader Deliverables</div>
<table>
<thead><tr><th>Chapter</th><th>Primary Deliverable</th><th>Audit Question</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>56 Memory</td><td>Memory contract and retrieval test</td><td>Which retrieved evidence changed the action?</td></tr>
<tr><td>57 Continual Learning</td><td>Versioned update panel</td><td>Did the update improve the new task without erasing protected skills?</td></tr>
<tr><td>58 Frontiers</td><td>Frontier claim watchlist</td><td>Which claims have artifacts, independent tests, or reproducible protocols?</td></tr>
<tr><td>59 Capstones</td><td>Portfolio-grade project folder</td><td>Can the result be rerun, critiqued, and improved?</td></tr>
<tr><td>60 Teaching</td><td>Undergraduate, graduate, and seminar path</td><td>Does each week end with an artifact and an evidence discussion?</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
</section>
<div class="whats-next"><h3>What's Next?</h3><p>After this part, <a href="ch_0460_appendices-index.xhtml">the appendices consolidate tools and references</a>.</p></div>
<nav class="landing-nav">Table of ContentsBuilding Embodied AIFrom Perception to Autonomous Ac...<a class="next" href="ch_0460_appendices-index.xhtml">Appendices</a></nav>



</body>
</html>
