<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en" amzn-src-id="165481">
  <head amzn-src-id="165482">
    <title amzn-src-id="165483">Appendix A: Linear Algebra and 3D Geometry Refresher</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="165484" />
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="165485" />
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="165486" />
  </head>
  <body amzn-src-id="165487">
<h1 amzn-src-id="165488">Appendix A: Linear Algebra and 3D Geometry Refresher</h1>

<div class="callout big-picture" amzn-src-id="165489">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="165490">Why This Appendix Exists</div>
<p amzn-src-id="165491">Linear Algebra and 3D Geometry Refresher supports the self-contained promise of the book. It gives readers enough reference material to continue without opening a second textbook.</p>
</div>
<h2 amzn-src-id="165492">Reference Notes</h2>
<p amzn-src-id="165493">This appendix should be used on demand. The main chapters link here when a mathematical tool, software package, benchmark, compute estimate, or citation convention needs a compact refresher.</p>
<h2 amzn-src-id="165494">Practical Checklist</h2>
<ol amzn-src-id="165495"><li amzn-src-id="165496">Identify the concept or tool needed by the chapter.</li><li amzn-src-id="165497">Review the minimal definition and notation.</li><li amzn-src-id="165498">Run the smallest example.</li><li amzn-src-id="165499">Return to the chapter with the missing prerequisite restored.</li></ol>
<div class="callout library-shortcut" amzn-src-id="165500">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="165501">Operational Shortcut</div>
<p amzn-src-id="165502">For tools and libraries, prefer official documentation and pinned environment files. For math and notation, prefer the definitions used in this book so symbols stay consistent.</p>
</div>
<section class="bibliography" amzn-src-id="165503">
<h2 amzn-src-id="165504">Bibliography &amp; Further Reading</h2>
<h3 amzn-src-id="165505">Foundational Papers, Tools, and References</h3>
<div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165506">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165507">Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G.. "Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction." (2018). <a href="http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html" amzn-src-id="165508">http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165509">A foundation for value functions, policy gradients, exploration, and the RL framing used throughout the book.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165510">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165511">Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y.. "MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control." (2012). <a href="https://mujoco.org/" amzn-src-id="165512">https://mujoco.org/</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165513">The simulator lineage behind much modern robot learning, now extended through MJX and Warp workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165514">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165515">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-1: Robotics Transformer for real-world control at scale." (2022). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817" amzn-src-id="165516">https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165517">A landmark in large-scale robot policy learning with transformer policies.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165518">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165519">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818" amzn-src-id="165520">https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165521">A central reference for connecting web-scale VLM knowledge to robot actions.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165522">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165523">Open X-Embodiment Collaboration. "Open X-Embodiment: Robotic Learning Datasets and RT-X Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864" amzn-src-id="165524">https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165525">The cross-embodiment data and transfer reference used by the data chapters.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165526">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165527">Chi, C. et al.. "Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137" amzn-src-id="165528">https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165529">The practical diffusion policy reference for imitation learning and continuous action generation.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165530">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165531">Hafner, D. et al.. "Mastering Diverse Domains through World Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104" amzn-src-id="165532">https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165533">DreamerV3, a modern reference for latent world models and imagination-based control.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165534">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165535">Hugging Face. "LeRobot." (2024). <a href="https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot" amzn-src-id="165536">https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165537">The open robot-learning stack used for datasets, policies, demos, and low-cost embodied AI workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165538">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165539">Official documentation and source repositories for Linear Algebra and 3D Geometry Refresher.</p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165540">Use official docs for install commands, current APIs, and version caveats before running the chapter lab.</p>
</div>
</section>



</body>
</html>
