<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en" amzn-src-id="157227">
  <head amzn-src-id="157228">
    <title amzn-src-id="157229">Chapter 59: Capstone Projects</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="157230" />
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="157231" />
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="157232" />
  </head>
  <body amzn-src-id="157233">
<h1 amzn-src-id="157234">Chapter 59: Capstone Projects</h1>

<blockquote class="epigraph" amzn-src-id="157235">
<p amzn-src-id="157236">"I am not a final project until my failure cases have filenames."</p>
<cite amzn-src-id="157237">A Capstone Artifact With Receipts</cite>
</blockquote>
<div class="callout big-picture" amzn-src-id="157238">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="157239">Big Picture</div>
<p amzn-src-id="157240"><strong amzn-src-id="157241">Capstone Projects</strong> closes the book by turning advanced embodied AI ideas into artifacts: memory traces, continual-learning panels, frontier claim audits, capstone deliverables, and teaching plans. The chapter converts the book into portfolio-grade projects. Each project defines a task contract, a baseline, a maintained-tool implementation, an evaluation panel, and a postmortem.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout key-insight" amzn-src-id="157242">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="157243">Chapter Through-Line</div>
<p amzn-src-id="157244">A capstone succeeds when it produces a reproducible embodied system artifact, a failure analysis, and a defensible metric. Read the chapter by asking the same four questions on every page: what changes in the loop, what evidence is saved, what can fail, and which tool makes the practical path shorter.</p>
</div>
<div class="overview" amzn-src-id="157245">
<h2 amzn-src-id="157246">Chapter Overview</h2>
<p amzn-src-id="157247">Chapter 59 turns the book into a portfolio of buildable embodied-AI projects. Each section is a ready-made capstone brief with a task contract, a baseline path, a maintained-tool path, an evidence panel, and a project-specific postmortem structure.</p>
<p amzn-src-id="157248">The chapter is deliberately diverse. It covers semantic search, language-guided navigation, manipulation, VLA adaptation, locomotion transfer, world-model planning, safety shielding, language planning, drones, multi-agent rescue, open-ended research, and application-track templates. Together they show how the same evidence discipline survives across very different embodiments.</p>
</div>
<div class="prereqs" amzn-src-id="157249"><h3 amzn-src-id="157250">Prerequisites</h3><p amzn-src-id="157251">Readers should be comfortable with Python, tensors, and the perception-action loop. When the chapter uses geometry, control, or probability, the relevant appendices provide a compact refresher.</p></div>
<h2 amzn-src-id="157252">Chapter Roadmap</h2>
<div class="section-grid" amzn-src-id="157253"><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="157254">59.1</span> <a href="ch_0441_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157255"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="157256">Object search in a simulated home</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="157257">Builds a semantic-search project with stopping rules, replay suites, and failure clustering.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="157258">59.2</span> <a href="ch_0442_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157259"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="157260">Language-guided navigation with replanning</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="157261">Turns instruction following into a grounded replanning benchmark with constraint-aware evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="157262">59.3</span> <a href="ch_0443_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157263"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="157264">Vision-based robotic pick-and-place (IL + RL)</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="157265">Stages imitation and reinforcement learning as a robustness-improvement story rather than a buzzword pair.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="157266">59.4</span> <a href="ch_0444_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157267"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="157268">Fine-tune an open VLA on a custom task (LeRobot)</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="157269">Shows how to adapt an open foundation policy while preserving dataset and evaluation discipline.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="157270">59.5</span> <a href="ch_0445_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157271"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="157272">Learned locomotion with sim-to-real analysis</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="157273">Centers the transfer gap and forces matched simulation-to-hardware evidence.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="157274">59.6</span> <a href="ch_0446_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157275"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="157276">World-model-based planning agent</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="157277">Converts latent prediction into a short-horizon planning capstone with drift diagnostics.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="157278">59.7</span> <a href="ch_0447_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157279"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="157280">Safety-shielded embodied agent</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="157281">Grades safety by intervention quality, false alarms, and task completion rather than slogans.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="157282">59.8</span> <a href="ch_0448_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157283"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="157284">LLM-based household task planner</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="157285">Separates language planning from grounding, affordances, and execution traces.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="157286">59.9</span> <a href="ch_0449_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157287"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="157288">Drone inspection planner</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="157289">Treats route planning, safety reserve, and coverage as one mission-level evidence problem.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="157290">59.10</span> <a href="ch_0450_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157291"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="157292">Multi-agent search and rescue</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="157293">Examines communication, role allocation, and stale-information failure in a team setting.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="157294">59.11</span> <a href="ch_0451_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157295"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="157296">Open-ended research project</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="157297">Provides a scoping protocol so student ideas become falsifiable embodied experiments.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="157298">59.12</span> <a href="ch_0452_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157299"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="157300">Application Track Capstone Templates</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="157301">Packages household, drone, driving, and humanoid tracks into one reusable evidence schema.</span></div>
<div class="callout library-shortcut" amzn-src-id="157302">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="157303">Tooling Note</div>
<p amzn-src-id="157304">This chapter uses the right-tool principle. Build the mechanism once, then reach for maintained tools such as MuJoCo, MJX, Isaac Lab, Genesis, Newton, Drake, ROS 2, and modern Gazebo when the task moves from learning exercise to working system.</p>
</div>
<section class="lab" id="lab-59" amzn-src-id="157305">
<h2 amzn-src-id="157306">Hands-On Lab: Draft a Capstone Evidence Card</h2>
<div class="lab-meta" amzn-src-id="157307"><span class="lab-duration" amzn-src-id="157308">Duration: about 60 minutes</span><span class="lab-difficulty" amzn-src-id="157309">Difficulty: Intermediate</span></div>
<div class="lab-objective" amzn-src-id="157310"><h3 amzn-src-id="157311">Objective</h3><p amzn-src-id="157312">Choose one capstone track from the chapter and produce a complete evidence card before writing implementation code.</p></div>
<div class="lab-steps" amzn-src-id="157313"><h3 amzn-src-id="157314">Steps</h3><ol amzn-src-id="157315"><li amzn-src-id="157316">Select one project track and state its operating domain, action interface, and safety constraint.</li><li amzn-src-id="157317">Name the baseline, the maintained-tool route, and one perturbation panel.</li><li amzn-src-id="157318">Specify the metric script, replay artifact, and failure taxonomy.</li><li amzn-src-id="157319">Present one likely failure case and the experiment that would clarify it.</li><li amzn-src-id="157320">Use the card as the first page of the project repository or proposal.</li></ol></div>
</section>
<div class="whats-next" amzn-src-id="157321"><h3 amzn-src-id="157322">What's Next?</h3><p amzn-src-id="157323">Continue with <a href="ch_0441_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-module-59-capstone-project.xhtml" amzn-src-id="157324">Section 59.1: Object search in a simulated home</a>, where the chapter moves from motivation to the first concrete idea.</p></div>
<p amzn-src-id="157325">This chapter is written for readers who want projects that can survive review, grading, and future extension. Read each section twice: first for the system idea, then for the repository artifact that would let a teammate rerun and critique the project later.</p>
<div class="comparison-table" amzn-src-id="157326">
<div class="comparison-table-title" amzn-src-id="157327">Chapter Tool Map</div>
<table amzn-src-id="157328">
<thead amzn-src-id="157329"><tr amzn-src-id="157330"><th amzn-src-id="157331">Tool or Library</th><th amzn-src-id="157332">Where It Pays Off</th></tr></thead>
<tbody amzn-src-id="157333">
<tr amzn-src-id="157334"><td amzn-src-id="157335">Habitat and AI2-THOR</td><td amzn-src-id="157336">Use for semantic search, household navigation, and instruction-following capstones.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="157337"><td amzn-src-id="157338">ManiSkill, robomimic, and LeRobot</td><td amzn-src-id="157339">Use for manipulation, imitation, and VLA adaptation projects.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="157340"><td amzn-src-id="157341">Isaac Lab, MuJoCo, and locomotion stacks</td><td amzn-src-id="157342">Use for control-heavy projects and sim-to-real analysis.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="157343"><td amzn-src-id="157344">PX4 SITL, CARLA, and CommonRoad</td><td amzn-src-id="157345">Use for aerial and autonomous-driving mission planning tracks.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="157346"><td amzn-src-id="157347">ROS 2 plus replay and logging tools</td><td amzn-src-id="157348">Use across all tracks to keep evidence, safety events, and postmortems inspectable.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
<div class="callout lab" amzn-src-id="157349"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="157350">Chapter Lab Extension</div><p amzn-src-id="157351">Extend the evidence card by adding a directory layout, one README grading checklist, and one explicit note explaining why the chosen baseline could plausibly beat the proposed method.</p></div>
<section class="chapter-production-blueprint" amzn-src-id="157352">
<h2 amzn-src-id="157353">Reader Outcomes And Assessment Pattern</h2>
<p amzn-src-id="157354">The chapter converts the book into a capstone studio. By the end, the reader should be able to scope a tractable embodied project, choose the right maintained stack, define a same-panel evaluation, and write a postmortem that distinguishes model failure from systems failure.</p>
<div class="comparison-table" amzn-src-id="157355">
<div class="comparison-table-title" amzn-src-id="157356">Chapter Production Checklist</div>
<table amzn-src-id="157357">
<thead amzn-src-id="157358"><tr amzn-src-id="157359"><th amzn-src-id="157360">Dimension</th><th amzn-src-id="157361">What The Reader Produces</th><th amzn-src-id="157362">Quality Gate</th></tr></thead>
<tbody amzn-src-id="157363">
<tr amzn-src-id="157364"><td amzn-src-id="157365">Mechanism</td><td amzn-src-id="157366">A concise explanation of the loop component changed by capstone design.</td><td amzn-src-id="157367">The explanation names observation, state, action, and feedback.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="157368"><td amzn-src-id="157369">Implementation</td><td amzn-src-id="157370">A baseline plus a maintained-tool route using Gymnasium, Habitat, ManiSkill.</td><td amzn-src-id="157371">The two routes save the same artifact schema.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="157372"><td amzn-src-id="157373">Evaluation</td><td amzn-src-id="157374">A same-panel metric comparison with perturbation and failure labels.</td><td amzn-src-id="157375">Numbers are co-computed in one run on one config.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="157376"><td amzn-src-id="157377">Communication</td><td amzn-src-id="157378">A short postmortem that distinguishes concept, system, and evidence claims.</td><td amzn-src-id="157379">The postmortem includes one limitation and one next test.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
<div class="callout lab" amzn-src-id="157380"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="157381">Chapter Lab Frame</div><p amzn-src-id="157382">Run the chapter as a two-pass build. First, implement the smallest baseline that exposes the mechanism. Second, replace the brittle part with the maintained tool that preserves the same contract. The deliverable is a folder with code, config, logs, plots or traces, and labeled failures.</p></div>
</section>
<section class="bibliography" amzn-src-id="157383">
<h2 amzn-src-id="157384">Bibliography &amp; Further Reading</h2>
<h3 amzn-src-id="157385">Foundational Papers, Tools, and References</h3>
<div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="157386">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="157387">Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G.. "Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction." (2018). <a href="http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html" amzn-src-id="157388">http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="157389">A foundation for value functions, policy gradients, exploration, and the RL framing used throughout the book.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="157390">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="157391">Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y.. "MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control." (2012). <a href="https://mujoco.org/" amzn-src-id="157392">https://mujoco.org/</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="157393">The simulator lineage behind much modern robot learning, now extended through MJX and Warp workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="157394">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="157395">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-1: Robotics Transformer for real-world control at scale." (2022). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817" amzn-src-id="157396">https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="157397">A landmark in large-scale robot policy learning with transformer policies.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="157398">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="157399">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818" amzn-src-id="157400">https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="157401">A central reference for connecting web-scale VLM knowledge to robot actions.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="157402">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="157403">Open X-Embodiment Collaboration. "Open X-Embodiment: Robotic Learning Datasets and RT-X Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864" amzn-src-id="157404">https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="157405">The cross-embodiment data and transfer reference used by the data chapters.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="157406">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="157407">Chi, C. et al.. "Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137" amzn-src-id="157408">https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="157409">The practical diffusion policy reference for imitation learning and continuous action generation.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="157410">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="157411">Hafner, D. et al.. "Mastering Diverse Domains through World Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104" amzn-src-id="157412">https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="157413">DreamerV3, a modern reference for latent world models and imagination-based control.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="157414">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="157415">Hugging Face. "LeRobot." (2024). <a href="https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot" amzn-src-id="157416">https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="157417">The open robot-learning stack used for datasets, policies, demos, and low-cost embodied AI workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="157418">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="157419">Official documentation and source repositories for Capstone Projects.</p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="157420">Use official docs to check install commands, current APIs, and version caveats before applying Capstone Projects in a lab or project.</p>
</div>
</section>




</body>
</html>
