<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en" amzn-src-id="1310">
  <head amzn-src-id="1311">
    <title amzn-src-id="1312">Part I: Foundations of Embodied AI</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="1313" />
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="1314" />
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="1315" />
  </head>
  <body amzn-src-id="1316">
<h1 amzn-src-id="1317">Part I: Foundations of Embodied AI</h1>

<div class="part-overview" amzn-src-id="1318">
<h2 amzn-src-id="1319">Part Overview</h2>
<p amzn-src-id="1320">This part covers the conceptual vocabulary of agents, environments, embodiment, and closed-loop intelligence. It connects formal ideas with the tools and labs needed to build working systems.</p>
<p amzn-src-id="1321">Chapters: 3. Each chapter includes theory, recipes, practical code, a library shortcut, and exercises.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout big-picture" amzn-src-id="1322">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="1323">Why This Part Matters</div>
<p amzn-src-id="1324">Foundations of Embodied AI gives the reader a working layer of the embodied AI stack. Later chapters assume this layer when agents must perceive, plan, act, and recover from mistakes.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter-card" amzn-src-id="1325">
<div class="chapter-card-header" amzn-src-id="1326"><a href="ch_0010_part-1-foundations-of-embodied-ai-module-01-from-static-ai-to-embodied-a.xhtml" amzn-src-id="1327"><span class="mod-num" amzn-src-id="1328">Chapter 1</span> From Static AI to Embodied AI</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body" amzn-src-id="1329"><p amzn-src-id="1330">This chapter develops from static ai to embodied ai as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list" amzn-src-id="1331"><li amzn-src-id="1332"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1333">1.1</span> Static prediction vs. embodied interaction</li><li amzn-src-id="1334"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1335">1.2</span> Why intelligence needs a world; the perception-action loop</li><li amzn-src-id="1336"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1337">1.3</span> Agents, environments, observations, actions, rewards, constraints</li><li amzn-src-id="1338"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1339">1.4</span> Physical vs. simulated embodiment</li><li amzn-src-id="1340"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1341">1.5</span> The "Physical AI" framing and why 2023-2026 changed the field</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card" amzn-src-id="1342">
<div class="chapter-card-header" amzn-src-id="1343"><a href="ch_0019_part-1-foundations-of-embodied-ai-module-02-the-agent-environment-interf.xhtml" amzn-src-id="1344"><span class="mod-num" amzn-src-id="1345">Chapter 2</span> The Agent-Environment Interface</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body" amzn-src-id="1346"><p amzn-src-id="1347">This chapter develops the agent-environment interface as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list" amzn-src-id="1348"><li amzn-src-id="1349"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1350">2.1</span> Agents and environments formally</li><li amzn-src-id="1351"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1352">2.2</span> State, observation, hidden variables, partial observability</li><li amzn-src-id="1353"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1354">2.3</span> Action types: discrete, continuous, symbolic, motor-level, chunked</li><li amzn-src-id="1355"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1356">2.4</span> Rewards, goals, costs, constraints</li><li amzn-src-id="1357"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1358">2.5</span> Episodes, horizons, trajectories, discounting</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card" amzn-src-id="1359">
<div class="chapter-card-header" amzn-src-id="1360"><a href="ch_0028_part-1-foundations-of-embodied-ai-module-03-embodied-system-architecture.xhtml" amzn-src-id="1361"><span class="mod-num" amzn-src-id="1362">Chapter 3</span> Embodied System Architectures</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body" amzn-src-id="1363"><p amzn-src-id="1364">This chapter develops embodied system architectures as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list" amzn-src-id="1365"><li amzn-src-id="1366"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1367">3.1</span> The canonical stack: sense, perceive, estimate, predict, plan, control, act</li><li amzn-src-id="1368"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1369">3.2</span> Classical modular robotics pipeline</li><li amzn-src-id="1370"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1371">3.3</span> End-to-end learned policy pipeline</li><li amzn-src-id="1372"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1373">3.4</span> Hybrid and hierarchical architectures</li><li amzn-src-id="1374"><span class="sec-num" amzn-src-id="1375">3.5</span> Reactive vs. deliberative agents</li></ul></div>
</div>
<div class="callout key-insight" amzn-src-id="1376">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="1377">Production Checklist Lens</div>
<p amzn-src-id="1378">Part I now frames each chapter around a visible learning contract: concept depth, concrete examples, exercises, diagrams, labs, tool shortcuts, misconception checks, research context, and construct-matched evaluation. This keeps the foundations readable while preparing readers for the mathematical and simulation-heavy chapters that follow.</p>
</div>
<div class="whats-next" amzn-src-id="1379"><h3 amzn-src-id="1380">What's Next?</h3><p amzn-src-id="1381">After this part, <a href="ch_0037_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-index.xhtml" amzn-src-id="1382">Part II: Mathematical, Robotics, and Control Foundations extends the stack</a>.</p></div>
<nav class="landing-nav" amzn-src-id="1383">Table of ContentsBuilding Embodied AIFrom Perception to Autonomous Ac...<a class="next" href="ch_0037_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-index.xhtml" amzn-src-id="1384">Part II: Mathematical, Robotics, and Control Foundat...</a></nav>



</body>
</html>
