<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en" amzn-src-id="1112">
  <head amzn-src-id="1113">
    <title amzn-src-id="1114">Application Reader Pathways</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="1115" />
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="1116" />
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="1117" />
  </head>
  <body amzn-src-id="1118">
<h1 amzn-src-id="1119">Application Reader Pathways</h1>

<div class="callout big-picture" amzn-src-id="1120"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="1121">Big Picture</div><p amzn-src-id="1122">This book can be read front to back, but application builders often need a direct route. Use these pathways when your goal is to build drones, autonomous vehicles, humanoids, mobile manipulators, industrial fleets, VLA systems, simulation-first policies, SLAM systems, safety cases, or research capstones.</p></div>
<p amzn-src-id="1123">Each pathway names the chapters to read, the sections to prioritize, and the artifact to produce. The common artifact is always the same: an operating-domain card, a state-action contract, a scenario panel, a safety boundary, a metric artifact, and a replayable failure case.</p>
<div class="comparison-table" amzn-src-id="1124"><div class="comparison-table-title" amzn-src-id="1125">Top Application Pathways</div><table amzn-src-id="1126"><thead amzn-src-id="1127"><tr amzn-src-id="1128"><th amzn-src-id="1129">Application</th><th amzn-src-id="1130">Primary Chapters</th><th amzn-src-id="1131">Build Artifact</th></tr></thead><tbody amzn-src-id="1132">
<tr amzn-src-id="1133"><td amzn-src-id="1134">Humanoid robots</td><td amzn-src-id="1135">5, 7, 8, 20, 21, 35, 45, 46, 54</td><td amzn-src-id="1136">Whole-body control trial with contact schedule and safety monitor.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="1137"><td amzn-src-id="1138">Drones and aerial robots</td><td amzn-src-id="1139">8, 11, 13, 20, 29, 30, 47, 54</td><td amzn-src-id="1140">PX4 evidence ladder from SITL to flight log review.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="1141"><td amzn-src-id="1142">Autonomous vehicles</td><td amzn-src-id="1143">5, 8, 13, 30, 36, 48, 52, 54</td><td amzn-src-id="1144">Closed-loop scenario panel with ODD and safety-case defeaters.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="1145"><td amzn-src-id="1146">Mobile manipulation</td><td amzn-src-id="1147">30, 31, 34, 35, 42, 43, 44, 50</td><td amzn-src-id="1148">Route, reachability, grasp, and recovery task card.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="1149"><td amzn-src-id="1150">Industrial fleets</td><td amzn-src-id="1151">30, 49, 52, 54, 55, 59</td><td amzn-src-id="1152">Fleet dashboard with throughput, interventions, congestion, and incidents.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="1153"><td amzn-src-id="1154">VLA and robot foundation models</td><td amzn-src-id="1155">21, 25, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 58</td><td amzn-src-id="1156">Fine-tuning and serving card with calibration, latency, and rollback.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="1157"><td amzn-src-id="1158">Simulation-first robot learning</td><td amzn-src-id="1159">9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 20, 36, 59</td><td amzn-src-id="1160">Sim-to-hardware reproducibility card with failure replay.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="1161"><td amzn-src-id="1162">SLAM and navigation systems</td><td amzn-src-id="1163">27, 28, 29, 30, 47</td><td amzn-src-id="1164">Mapping and navigation manifest with degraded-sensing perturbations.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="1165"><td amzn-src-id="1166">Safety-critical embodied AI</td><td amzn-src-id="1167">52, 53, 54, 55</td><td amzn-src-id="1168">Assurance argument with claims, evidence, defeaters, and residual risk.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="1169"><td amzn-src-id="1170">Research platforms and capstones</td><td amzn-src-id="1171">56, 57, 58, 59, 60</td><td amzn-src-id="1172">Application-track capstone with reproducible metric artifact.</td></tr>
</tbody></table></div>
<div class="callout key-insight" amzn-src-id="1173"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="1174">One Pattern, Many Bodies</div><p amzn-src-id="1175">The robot body changes the math and tools, but the engineering proof remains stable: define the domain, expose the interface, test the scenario panel, save the evidence, and explain the failure.</p></div>
<div class="callout practical-example" amzn-src-id="1176"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="1177">How To Use The Map</div><p amzn-src-id="1178">A drone builder can start with Chapters 8, 29, 30, and 47, then use Chapter 54 for operational risk. A VLA builder can start with Chapters 21, 34, and 35, then use Chapter 55 for serving and Chapter 59 for a capstone template.</p></div>




</body>
</html>
