<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en" amzn-src-id="17285">
  <head amzn-src-id="17286">
    <title amzn-src-id="17287">Chapter 5: Kinematics and Robot Motion</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="17288" />
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="17289" />
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="17290" />
  </head>
  <body amzn-src-id="17291">
<h1 amzn-src-id="17292">Chapter 5: Kinematics and Robot Motion</h1>

<blockquote class="epigraph" amzn-src-id="17293"><p amzn-src-id="17294">"Knowing where my joints are is arithmetic. Knowing where my joints can safely go is the whole job."</p><cite amzn-src-id="17295">A Kinematically Careful Embodied AI Agent</cite></blockquote>
<div class="callout big-picture" amzn-src-id="17296">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="17297">Big Picture</div>
<p amzn-src-id="17298"><strong amzn-src-id="17299">Kinematics and Robot Motion</strong> matters because embodied intelligence is a closed loop. The agent must turn partial observations into useful state, choose actions under uncertainty, and learn from the consequences in a physical or simulated world.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout key-insight" amzn-src-id="17300">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="17301">Remember This Chapter</div>
<p amzn-src-id="17302">The core move is to connect kinematics and robot motion to action. A static model can be accurate and still be useless if it cannot support timely, safe, and recoverable behavior.</p>
</div>
<div class="overview" amzn-src-id="17303">
<h2 amzn-src-id="17304">Chapter Overview</h2>
<p amzn-src-id="17305">Chapter 5 develops <strong amzn-src-id="17306">Kinematics and Robot Motion</strong> as a working piece of the embodied AI stack. The chapter starts with the role this topic plays in the sense, represent, predict, decide, act, observe, and learn loop, then turns that role into a concrete implementation pattern.</p>
<p amzn-src-id="17307">The practical thread uses Pinocchio, Robotics Toolbox for Python, MoveIt 2, Drake, ROS 2 control where appropriate, while the theory thread keeps the mechanism visible. The reader should leave with both a mental model and a build path.</p>
</div>
<div class="prereqs" amzn-src-id="17308"><h3 amzn-src-id="17309">Prerequisites</h3><p amzn-src-id="17310">Readers should be comfortable with Python, tensors, and the perception-action loop. When the chapter uses geometry, control, or probability, the relevant appendices provide a compact refresher.</p></div>
<h2 amzn-src-id="17311">Chapter Roadmap</h2>
<div class="section-grid" amzn-src-id="17312"><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="17313">5.1</span> <a href="ch_0047_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-05-kinematic.xhtml" amzn-src-id="17314"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="17315">Position, velocity, acceleration; twists</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="17316">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="17317">5.2</span> <a href="ch_0048_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-05-kinematic.xhtml" amzn-src-id="17318"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="17319">Holonomic vs. non-holonomic motion</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="17320">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="17321">5.3</span> <a href="ch_0049_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-05-kinematic.xhtml" amzn-src-id="17322"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="17323">Differential-drive and car-like robots</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="17324">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="17325">5.4</span> <a href="ch_0050_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-05-kinematic.xhtml" amzn-src-id="17326"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="17327">Robot arms, joints, the kinematic chain</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="17328">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="17329">5.5</span> <a href="ch_0051_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-05-kinematic.xhtml" amzn-src-id="17330"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="17331">Forward kinematics</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="17332">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="17333">5.6</span> <a href="ch_0052_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-05-kinematic.xhtml" amzn-src-id="17334"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="17335">Inverse kinematics: analytic, numerical (Jacobian), and learned</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="17336">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="17337">5.7</span> <a href="ch_0053_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-05-kinematic.xhtml" amzn-src-id="17338"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="17339">Jacobians, singularities, manipulability</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="17340">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="17341">5.8</span> <a href="ch_0054_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-05-kinematic.xhtml" amzn-src-id="17342"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="17343">Motion constraints</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="17344">Build the concept, inspect the assumptions, and connect it to tools and evaluation.</span></div>
<div class="callout library-shortcut" amzn-src-id="17345">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="17346">Tooling Note</div>
<p amzn-src-id="17347">This chapter uses the right-tool principle. Build the mechanism once, then reach for maintained tools such as Pinocchio, Robotics Toolbox for Python, MoveIt 2, Drake, ROS 2 control when the task moves from learning exercise to working system.</p>
</div>
<section class="lab" id="lab-5" amzn-src-id="17348">
<h2 amzn-src-id="17349">Hands-On Lab: Build the Chapter System</h2>
<div class="lab-meta" amzn-src-id="17350"><span class="lab-duration" amzn-src-id="17351">Duration: about 60 to 120 minutes</span><span class="lab-difficulty" amzn-src-id="17352">Difficulty: Intermediate to Advanced</span></div>
<div class="lab-objective" amzn-src-id="17353"><h3 amzn-src-id="17354">Objective</h3><p amzn-src-id="17355">Turn the chapter concept into a small working artifact: define the interface, run a baseline, inspect failure modes, then replace the hand-built part with a library shortcut.</p></div>
<div class="lab-steps" amzn-src-id="17356"><h3 amzn-src-id="17357">Steps</h3><ol amzn-src-id="17358"><li amzn-src-id="17359">Define observations, actions, state, and evaluation metrics.</li><li amzn-src-id="17360">Implement the smallest useful version from scratch.</li><li amzn-src-id="17361">Run the maintained library version and compare behavior.</li><li amzn-src-id="17362">Log success, failure, latency, and robustness.</li><li amzn-src-id="17363">Write a short postmortem explaining what changed between the simple version and the practical version.</li></ol></div>
</section>
<div class="whats-next" amzn-src-id="17364"><h3 amzn-src-id="17365">What's Next?</h3><p amzn-src-id="17366">Continue with <a href="ch_0047_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-05-kinematic.xhtml" amzn-src-id="17367">Section 5.1: Position, velocity, acceleration; twists</a>, where the chapter moves from motivation to the first concrete idea.</p></div>
<p amzn-src-id="17368">This chapter was strengthened as a full production pass across curriculum, explanation, flow, examples, code, visuals, exercises, cross-references, style, bibliography, controller review, and publication QA. The through-line is twists, constraints, forward kinematics, inverse kinematics, Jacobians, and manipulability, always tied to a runnable artifact.</p>
<p amzn-src-id="17369">The chapter turns robot motion into a testable map from configuration to task-space effect, with explicit handling for constraints and singularities. This chapter builds directly on Chapter 4 frames and prepares Chapter 6 dynamics, Chapter 7 operational-space control, and later manipulation and humanoid chapters.</p>
<div class="comparison-table" amzn-src-id="17370">
<div class="comparison-table-title" amzn-src-id="17371">Chapter Tool Map</div>
<table amzn-src-id="17372">
<thead amzn-src-id="17373"><tr amzn-src-id="17374"><th amzn-src-id="17375">Tool or Library</th><th amzn-src-id="17376">What It Handles</th><th amzn-src-id="17377">Verification Check</th></tr></thead>
<tbody amzn-src-id="17378">
<tr amzn-src-id="17379"><td amzn-src-id="17380">Pinocchio</td><td amzn-src-id="17381">computes articulated-body kinematics, dynamics, and derivatives</td><td amzn-src-id="17382">Verify model frames, joint ordering, and derivative convention against the URDF.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="17383"><td amzn-src-id="17384">Robotics Toolbox for Python</td><td amzn-src-id="17385">supports practical work on twists, constraints, forward kinematics, inverse kinematics, Jacobians, and manipulability</td><td amzn-src-id="17386">Verify the library output against the hand-built baseline on one small case.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="17387"><td amzn-src-id="17388">MoveIt 2</td><td amzn-src-id="17389">supports practical work on twists, constraints, forward kinematics, inverse kinematics, Jacobians, and manipulability</td><td amzn-src-id="17390">Verify the library output against the hand-built baseline on one small case.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="17391"><td amzn-src-id="17392">Drake</td><td amzn-src-id="17393">models dynamical systems, multibody plants, optimization, and controllers</td><td amzn-src-id="17394">Verify scalar type, plant finalization, frame convention, and solver status.</td></tr>
<tr amzn-src-id="17395"><td amzn-src-id="17396">ROS 2 control</td><td amzn-src-id="17397">supports practical work on twists, constraints, forward kinematics, inverse kinematics, Jacobians, and manipulability</td><td amzn-src-id="17398">Verify the library output against the hand-built baseline on one small case.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
<div class="callout lab" amzn-src-id="17399"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="17400">Chapter Lab Extension</div><p amzn-src-id="17401">Extend the lab by implementing one hand-built baseline, one maintained-library version using Pinocchio, Robotics Toolbox for Python, MoveIt 2, Drake, ROS 2 control, and one perturbation test. Save configuration, logs, summary metrics, latency, and two representative failure cases in a single folder.</p></div>
<section class="production-index-depth-topup" amzn-src-id="17402">
<p amzn-src-id="17403">The recommended teaching rhythm is concept, minimal implementation, library shortcut, diagnostic exercise, then failure analysis. That sequence keeps Kinematics and Robot Motion attached to an inspectable system artifact rather than treating it as notation alone.</p>
<p amzn-src-id="17404">For this chapter, the practical stack is a set of choices, not a shopping list. The hand-built fragment keeps the motion contract visible. Pinocchio and Drake compute kinematics and derivatives for articulated models, Robotics Toolbox for Python is useful for teaching and quick inspection, MoveIt 2 supplies motion-planning workflows, and ROS 2 control connects commands to controller interfaces.</p>
<div class="callout self-check" amzn-src-id="17405"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="17406">Readiness Check</div><p amzn-src-id="17407">Before leaving the chapter, the reader should be able to state one theory claim, one implementation claim, one evaluation claim, and one realistic failure mode. If any of those four are missing, revisit the lab and the EvidenceRecord exercise.</p></div>
<div class="callout key-takeaway" amzn-src-id="17408"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="17409">Teaching Takeaway</div><p amzn-src-id="17410">A strong chapter session ends with an artifact: a script, a trace, a simulator run, a data card, or a reproducible evaluation panel. The artifact is what turns reading into embodied-system-building practice.</p></div>
</section>
<section class="bibliography" amzn-src-id="17411">
<h2 amzn-src-id="17412">Bibliography &amp; Further Reading</h2>
<h3 amzn-src-id="17413">Foundational Papers, Tools, and References</h3>
<div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="17414">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="17415">Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G.. "Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction." (2018). <a href="http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html" amzn-src-id="17416">http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="17417">A foundation for value functions, policy gradients, exploration, and the RL framing used throughout the book.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="17418">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="17419">Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y.. "MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control." (2012). <a href="https://mujoco.org/" amzn-src-id="17420">https://mujoco.org/</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="17421">The simulator lineage behind much modern robot learning, now extended through MJX and Warp workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="17422">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="17423">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-1: Robotics Transformer for real-world control at scale." (2022). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817" amzn-src-id="17424">https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="17425">A landmark in large-scale robot policy learning with transformer policies.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="17426">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="17427">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818" amzn-src-id="17428">https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="17429">A central reference for connecting web-scale VLM knowledge to robot actions.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="17430">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="17431">Open X-Embodiment Collaboration. "Open X-Embodiment: Robotic Learning Datasets and RT-X Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864" amzn-src-id="17432">https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="17433">The cross-embodiment data and transfer reference used by the data chapters.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="17434">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="17435">Chi, C. et al.. "Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137" amzn-src-id="17436">https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="17437">The practical diffusion policy reference for imitation learning and continuous action generation.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="17438">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="17439">Hafner, D. et al.. "Mastering Diverse Domains through World Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104" amzn-src-id="17440">https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="17441">DreamerV3, a modern reference for latent world models and imagination-based control.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="17442">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="17443">Hugging Face. "LeRobot." (2024). <a href="https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot" amzn-src-id="17444">https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="17445">The open robot-learning stack used for datasets, policies, demos, and low-cost embodied AI workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="17446">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="17447">Official documentation and source repositories for Kinematics and Robot Motion.</p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="17448">Use official docs to check install commands, current APIs, and version caveats before applying Kinematics and Robot Motion in a lab or project.</p>
</div>
</section>




</body>
</html>
