<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en" amzn-src-id="84999">
  <head amzn-src-id="85000">
    <title amzn-src-id="85001">Chapter 28: 3D Perception and Neural Scene Representations</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="85002" />
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="85003" />
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="85004" />
  </head>
  <body amzn-src-id="85005">
<h1 amzn-src-id="85006">Chapter 28: 3D Perception and Neural Scene Representations</h1>

<blockquote class="epigraph" amzn-src-id="85007"><p amzn-src-id="85008">"A flat image tells me what is there. A 3D scene tells me what I am allowed to reach for."</p><cite amzn-src-id="85009">A Depth-Aware Embodied AI Agent</cite></blockquote>
<div class="callout big-picture" amzn-src-id="85010"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="85011">Big Picture</div><p amzn-src-id="85012"><strong amzn-src-id="85013">3D Perception and Neural Scene Representations</strong> turns perception into action-ready state. A flat image can tell the agent what is visible. A 3D scene representation tells it what space it can occupy, what it can touch, and what might be hidden behind the next move.</p></div>
<div class="callout key-insight" amzn-src-id="85014"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="85015">Remember This Chapter</div><p amzn-src-id="85016">The durable test is not whether a model looks impressive. The test is whether it improves a robot's next action while leaving a clear evidence trail for debugging.</p></div>
<div class="overview" amzn-src-id="85017"><h2 amzn-src-id="85018">Chapter Overview</h2><p amzn-src-id="85019">Chapter 28 develops <strong amzn-src-id="85020">3D Perception and Neural Scene Representations</strong> as a working piece of the embodied AI stack. It connects visual or spatial evidence to state estimates, action choices, visual servoing loops, timing budgets, and failure labels.</p><p amzn-src-id="85021">The chapter follows the right-tool rhythm used across the book: build the mechanism once, then move to maintained tools such as Open3D, PyTorch, OpenCV, Gaussian Splatting workflows.</p></div>
<div class="prereqs" amzn-src-id="85022"><h3 amzn-src-id="85023">Prerequisites</h3><p amzn-src-id="85024">Readers should be comfortable with Python, tensors, coordinate frames, sensor noise, and the perception-action loop. Useful refreshers appear in <a href="ch_0038_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-04-spatial-r.xhtml" amzn-src-id="85025">Chapter 4</a>, <a href="ch_0070_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-08-sensors-p.xhtml" amzn-src-id="85026">Chapter 8</a>, and <a href="ch_0110_part-3-simulation-tooling-and-the-modern-stack-module-13-domain-randomiz.xhtml" amzn-src-id="85027">Chapter 13</a>.</p></div>
<h2 amzn-src-id="85028">Chapter Roadmap</h2><div class="section-grid" amzn-src-id="85029"><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="85030">28.1</span> <a href="ch_0212_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml" amzn-src-id="85031"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="85032">Why 3D matters for manipulation and navigation</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="85033">3D is the bridge from pixels to reachable, traversable, and occluded space.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="85034">28.2</span> <a href="ch_0213_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml" amzn-src-id="85035"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="85036">Point clouds and depth maps</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="85037">depth maps become point clouds when pixel coordinates are lifted through camera intrinsics.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="85038">28.3</span> <a href="ch_0214_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml" amzn-src-id="85039"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="85040">3D detection and scene reconstruction</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="85041">the agent needs object hypotheses that live in world coordinates and survive across views.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="85042">28.4</span> <a href="ch_0215_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml" amzn-src-id="85043"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="85044">Occupancy grids and voxel maps</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="85045">occupancy models store where the world is free, occupied, or unknown.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="85046">28.5</span> <a href="ch_0216_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml" amzn-src-id="85047"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="85048">NeRF: implicit radiance fields</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="85049">a NeRF stores a scene as a function from 3D position and view direction to density and color.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="85050">28.6</span> <a href="ch_0217_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml" amzn-src-id="85051"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="85052">3D Gaussian Splatting: explicit, editable, real-time</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="85053">Gaussian splats store scene content as explicit ellipsoids that can render quickly and be edited locally.</span><span class="section-num" amzn-src-id="85054">28.7</span> <a href="ch_0218_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml" amzn-src-id="85055"><span class="section-title" amzn-src-id="85056">Scene representations for robotics: SLAM, real2sim, manipulation</span></a><span class="section-desc" amzn-src-id="85057">a robot-ready scene representation must support pose tracking, action planning, and updates after contact.</span></div>
<div class="callout library-shortcut" amzn-src-id="85058"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="85059">Tooling Note</div><p amzn-src-id="85060">This chapter uses the right-tool principle. The teaching baseline exposes units, frames, uncertainty, and logging. The shortcut stack uses maintained tools to handle optimized kernels, visualization, data formats, simulation hooks, and deployment interfaces.</p></div>
<section class="lab" id="lab-28" amzn-src-id="85061">
<h2 amzn-src-id="85062">Hands-On Lab: Build A Scene-Representation Query Router</h2>
<div class="lab-meta" amzn-src-id="85063"><span class="lab-duration" amzn-src-id="85064">Duration: about 90 minutes</span><span class="lab-difficulty" amzn-src-id="85065">Difficulty: Intermediate</span></div>
<div class="lab-objective" amzn-src-id="85066"><h3 amzn-src-id="85067">Objective</h3><p amzn-src-id="85068">Build a small router that sends localization, collision, contact, rendering, and real2sim queries to representations with matching semantics.</p></div>
<div class="lab-skills" amzn-src-id="85069"><h3 amzn-src-id="85070">What You'll Practice</h3><ul amzn-src-id="85071"><li amzn-src-id="85072">Separating visualization memory from safety-critical geometry.</li><li amzn-src-id="85073">Choosing between point clouds, occupancy, object graphs, NeRFs, and Gaussian splats.</li><li amzn-src-id="85074">Attaching provenance, frame, and update-rate requirements to each query.</li><li amzn-src-id="85075">Designing a failure label for stale or mismatched scene memory.</li></ul></div>
<div class="lab-prereqs" amzn-src-id="85076"><h3 amzn-src-id="85077">Setup</h3><p amzn-src-id="85078">Start with Python's standard data structures. Add Open3D, Nerfstudio, or ROS 2 only after the query ownership table is clear.</p><pre amzn-src-id="85079"><code class="language-bash" amzn-src-id="85080"><span class="c1" amzn-src-id="85081"># Optional tools for extending the lab after the baseline router works.</span>
python<span class="w" amzn-src-id="85082"> </span>-m<span class="w" amzn-src-id="85083"> </span>pip<span class="w" amzn-src-id="85084"> </span>install<span class="w" amzn-src-id="85085"> </span>numpy<span class="w" amzn-src-id="85086"> </span>open3d</code></pre><div class="code-caption" amzn-src-id="85087"><strong amzn-src-id="85088">Code Fragment 28.L1:</strong> This command installs NumPy and Open3D for optional geometry experiments. The first router can run without them, which keeps the representation decision visible.</div></div>
<div class="lab-steps" amzn-src-id="85089"><h3 amzn-src-id="85090">Steps</h3><div class="lab-step" amzn-src-id="85091"><h4 amzn-src-id="85092">Step 1: List The Robot Queries</h4><p amzn-src-id="85093">Write queries for localize, avoid collision, plan grasp, render operator view, and export a real2sim scene.</p></div><div class="lab-step" amzn-src-id="85094"><h4 amzn-src-id="85095">Step 2: Route Each Query</h4><p amzn-src-id="85096">Assign each query to a representation that can answer it with the right semantics and risk level.</p><pre amzn-src-id="85097"><code class="language-python" amzn-src-id="85098"><span class="c1" amzn-src-id="85099"># Route scene queries to representations with matching safety semantics.</span>
<span class="c1" amzn-src-id="85100"># Rendering and collision checking deliberately use different owners.</span>
<span class="n" amzn-src-id="85101">routes</span> <span class="o" amzn-src-id="85102">=</span> <span class="p" amzn-src-id="85103">{</span>
<span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85104">"localize"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85105">:</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85106">"visual_inertial_slam"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85107">,</span>
<span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85108">"avoid_collision"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85109">:</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85110">"inflated_occupancy_or_esdf"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85111">,</span>
<span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85112">"plan_grasp"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85113">:</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85114">"object_pose_plus_contact_geometry"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85115">,</span>
<span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85116">"render_operator_view"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85117">:</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85118">"nerf_or_gaussian_splats"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85119">,</span>
<span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85120">"export_real2sim"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85121">:</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85122">"mesh_plus_object_scene_graph"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85123">,</span>
<span class="p" amzn-src-id="85124">}</span>
<span class="k" amzn-src-id="85125">for</span> <span class="n" amzn-src-id="85126">query</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85127">,</span> <span class="n" amzn-src-id="85128">owner</span> <span class="ow" amzn-src-id="85129">in</span> <span class="n" amzn-src-id="85130">routes</span><span class="o" amzn-src-id="85131">.</span><span class="n" amzn-src-id="85132">items</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85133">():</span>
<span class="nb" amzn-src-id="85134">print</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85135">(</span><span class="sa" amzn-src-id="85136">f</span><span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85137">"</span><span class="si" amzn-src-id="85138">{</span><span class="n" amzn-src-id="85139">query</span><span class="si" amzn-src-id="85140">}</span><span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85141">: </span><span class="si" amzn-src-id="85142">{</span><span class="n" amzn-src-id="85143">owner</span><span class="si" amzn-src-id="85144">}</span><span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85145">"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85146">)</span></code></pre><div class="code-output" amzn-src-id="85147">localize: visual_inertial_slam
avoid_collision: inflated_occupancy_or_esdf
plan_grasp: object_pose_plus_contact_geometry
render_operator_view: nerf_or_gaussian_splats
export_real2sim: mesh_plus_object_scene_graph</div><div class="code-caption" amzn-src-id="85148"><strong amzn-src-id="85149">Code Fragment 28.L2:</strong> The router gives `avoid_collision` a conservative map while assigning `render_operator_view` to NeRF or Gaussian splats. That separation is the central safety lesson of the chapter.</div></div><div class="lab-step" amzn-src-id="85150"><h4 amzn-src-id="85151">Step 3: Add Freshness Requirements</h4><p amzn-src-id="85152">Attach maximum age, frame, and provenance fields to each route so stale scene memory can be rejected.</p></div><div class="lab-step" amzn-src-id="85153"><h4 amzn-src-id="85154">Step 4: Add A Failure Case</h4><p amzn-src-id="85155">Create one case where a rendered scene is visually plausible but too stale or too non-conservative for collision checking.</p></div><div class="lab-step" amzn-src-id="85156"><h4 amzn-src-id="85157">Step 5: Replace One Route With A Tool</h4><p amzn-src-id="85158">Use Open3D for a point-cloud or voxel route, or Nerfstudio for a visual replay route, while preserving the query contract.</p></div></div>
<div class="lab-expected" amzn-src-id="85159"><h3 amzn-src-id="85160">Expected Output</h3><p amzn-src-id="85161">A query table that maps each robot question to a representation, required metadata, freshness limit, and failure label.</p></div>
<div class="lab-stretch" amzn-src-id="85162"><h3 amzn-src-id="85163">Stretch Goals</h3><ul amzn-src-id="85164"><li amzn-src-id="85165">Create a tiny Open3D point cloud and route collision queries to it.</li><li amzn-src-id="85166">Add a Gaussian-splat route for visualization with an explicit no-control warning.</li><li amzn-src-id="85167">Export the routing table as JSON for a simulator or ROS 2 node.</li></ul></div>
<div class="kindle-disclosure lab-solution" amzn-src-id="85168"><p class="kindle-disclosure-title" amzn-src-id="85169">Complete Solution</p><pre amzn-src-id="85170"><code class="language-python" amzn-src-id="85171"><span class="c1" amzn-src-id="85172"># Complete baseline for the scene-representation query router.</span>
<span class="c1" amzn-src-id="85173"># It flags unsafe attempts to use rendering memory for collision checks.</span>
<span class="n" amzn-src-id="85174">routes</span> <span class="o" amzn-src-id="85175">=</span> <span class="p" amzn-src-id="85176">{</span>
<span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85177">"avoid_collision"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85178">:</span> <span class="p" amzn-src-id="85179">{</span><span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85180">"owner"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85181">:</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85182">"inflated_occupancy_or_esdf"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85183">,</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85184">"max_age_ms"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85185">:</span> <span class="mi" amzn-src-id="85186">100</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85187">},</span>
<span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85188">"render_operator_view"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85189">:</span> <span class="p" amzn-src-id="85190">{</span><span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85191">"owner"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85192">:</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85193">"nerf_or_gaussian_splats"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85194">,</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85195">"max_age_ms"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85196">:</span> <span class="mi" amzn-src-id="85197">2000</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85198">},</span>
<span class="p" amzn-src-id="85199">}</span>
<span class="n" amzn-src-id="85200">requested_owner</span> <span class="o" amzn-src-id="85201">=</span> <span class="n" amzn-src-id="85202">routes</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85203">[</span><span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85204">"render_operator_view"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85205">][</span><span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85206">"owner"</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85207">]</span>
<span class="n" amzn-src-id="85208">failure_label</span> <span class="o" amzn-src-id="85209">=</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85210">"wrong_representation_for_collision"</span> <span class="k" amzn-src-id="85211">if</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85212">"splat"</span> <span class="ow" amzn-src-id="85213">in</span> <span class="n" amzn-src-id="85214">requested_owner</span> <span class="k" amzn-src-id="85215">else</span> <span class="s2" amzn-src-id="85216">"none"</span>
<span class="nb" amzn-src-id="85217">print</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85218">(</span><span class="n" amzn-src-id="85219">failure_label</span><span class="p" amzn-src-id="85220">)</span></code></pre><div class="code-output" amzn-src-id="85221">wrong_representation_for_collision</div><div class="code-caption" amzn-src-id="85222"><strong amzn-src-id="85223">Code Fragment 28.L3:</strong> The complete solution labels an unsafe routing attempt when visualization memory is reused for collision checking. The `failure_label` makes the representation mismatch replayable.</div></div>
</section>
<p amzn-src-id="85224">Use this chapter as a complete teaching unit for scene memory that a robot can query: point clouds, object states, occupancy, neural fields, Gaussian splats, SLAM layers, and real2sim exports. The central question is which representation can answer the action query safely, not which representation renders the most impressive image.</p><div class="comparison-table" amzn-src-id="85225"><div class="comparison-table-title" amzn-src-id="85226">Chapter Tool Map</div><table amzn-src-id="85227"><thead amzn-src-id="85228"><tr amzn-src-id="85229"><th amzn-src-id="85230">Tool or Library</th><th amzn-src-id="85231">Where It Pays Off</th></tr></thead><tbody amzn-src-id="85232"><tr amzn-src-id="85233"><td amzn-src-id="85234">Open3D</td><td amzn-src-id="85235">RGB-D conversion, point clouds, voxelization, registration, normals, and geometry inspection.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="85236"><td amzn-src-id="85237">OpenCV</td><td amzn-src-id="85238">Camera intrinsics, stereo reconstruction, pose estimation, and calibration checks before 3D fusion.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="85239"><td amzn-src-id="85240">PyTorch</td><td amzn-src-id="85241">Learned scene encoders, neural field components, uncertainty heads, and differentiable geometry prototypes.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="85242"><td amzn-src-id="85243">Nerfstudio</td><td amzn-src-id="85244">NeRF and Splatfacto workflows for neural scene training, inspection, and export experiments.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="85245"><td amzn-src-id="85246">gsplat and 3DGS workflows</td><td amzn-src-id="85247">CUDA-accelerated Gaussian splat rendering and explicit scene-element experimentation.</td></tr><tr amzn-src-id="85248"><td amzn-src-id="85249">ROS 2 and SLAM stacks</td><td amzn-src-id="85250">Pose tracking, map publication, diagnostics, replay, and integration with navigation or manipulation.</td></tr></tbody></table></div><div class="callout self-check" amzn-src-id="85251"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="85252">Readiness Check</div><p amzn-src-id="85253">Before leaving the chapter, the reader should be able to choose a representation for localization, collision checking, contact planning, visual replay, object reasoning, and simulation export.</p></div><div class="callout key-takeaway" amzn-src-id="85254"><div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="85255">Teaching Takeaway</div><p amzn-src-id="85256">A strong chapter session ends with a query map: every scene representation is tied to the robot query it can answer and the safety checks it cannot replace.</p></div>
<div class="whats-next" amzn-src-id="85257"><h3 amzn-src-id="85258">What's Next?</h3><p amzn-src-id="85259">Start with <a href="ch_0212_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml" amzn-src-id="85260">Section 28.1: Why 3D matters for manipulation and navigation</a>. After this chapter, continue to <a href="ch_0219_part-6-embodied-perception-module-29-localization-and-mapping-slam-index.xhtml" amzn-src-id="85261">Chapter 29: Localization and Mapping (SLAM)</a>.</p></div>
<section class="bibliography" amzn-src-id="85262"><h2 amzn-src-id="85263">Bibliography &amp; Further Reading</h2><h3 amzn-src-id="85264">Foundational Papers, Tools, and References</h3><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="85265"><p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="85266">Mildenhall, B. et al.. "NeRF: Representing Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for View Synthesis." ECCV, 2020. <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.08934" amzn-src-id="85267">https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.08934</a></p><p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="85268">The foundational neural radiance field paper behind implicit scene representations.</p></div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="85269"><p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="85270">Kerbl, B. et al.. "3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time Radiance Field Rendering." ACM TOG, 2023. <a href="https://repo-sam.inria.fr/fungraph/3d-gaussian-splatting/" amzn-src-id="85271">https://repo-sam.inria.fr/fungraph/3d-gaussian-splatting/</a></p><p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="85272">The reference for explicit Gaussian scene elements and real-time rendering.</p></div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="85273"><p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="85274">Zhou, Q.-Y., Park, J., and Koltun, V.. "Open3D: A Modern Library for 3D Data Processing." arXiv, 2018. <a href="https://www.open3d.org/" amzn-src-id="85275">https://www.open3d.org/</a></p><p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="85276">A practical library reference for point clouds, meshes, registration, and visualization.</p></div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="85277"><p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="85278">Tancik, M. et al.. "Nerfstudio: A Modular Framework for Neural Radiance Field Development." SIGGRAPH, 2023. <a href="https://docs.nerf.studio/" amzn-src-id="85279">https://docs.nerf.studio/</a></p><p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="85280">A maintained workflow for training, inspecting, and exporting neural scene models.</p></div></section>




</body>
</html>
