<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en" amzn-src-id="165541">
  <head amzn-src-id="165542">
    <title amzn-src-id="165543">Appendix B: Probability, Estimation, and Optimization Refresher</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="165544" />
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="165545" />
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" amzn-src-id="165546" />
  </head>
  <body amzn-src-id="165547">
<h1 amzn-src-id="165548">Appendix B: Probability, Estimation, and Optimization Refresher</h1>

<div class="callout big-picture" amzn-src-id="165549">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="165550">Why This Appendix Exists</div>
<p amzn-src-id="165551">Probability, Estimation, and Optimization Refresher supports the self-contained promise of the book. It gives readers enough reference material to continue without opening a second textbook.</p>
</div>
<h2 amzn-src-id="165552">Reference Notes</h2>
<p amzn-src-id="165553">This appendix should be used on demand. The main chapters link here when a mathematical tool, software package, benchmark, compute estimate, or citation convention needs a compact refresher.</p>
<h2 amzn-src-id="165554">Practical Checklist</h2>
<ol amzn-src-id="165555"><li amzn-src-id="165556">Identify the concept or tool needed by the chapter.</li><li amzn-src-id="165557">Review the minimal definition and notation.</li><li amzn-src-id="165558">Run the smallest example.</li><li amzn-src-id="165559">Return to the chapter with the missing prerequisite restored.</li></ol>
<div class="callout library-shortcut" amzn-src-id="165560">
<div class="callout-title" amzn-src-id="165561">Operational Shortcut</div>
<p amzn-src-id="165562">For tools and libraries, prefer official documentation and pinned environment files. For math and notation, prefer the definitions used in this book so symbols stay consistent.</p>
</div>
<section class="bibliography" amzn-src-id="165563">
<h2 amzn-src-id="165564">Bibliography &amp; Further Reading</h2>
<h3 amzn-src-id="165565">Foundational Papers, Tools, and References</h3>
<div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165566">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165567">Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G.. "Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction." (2018). <a href="http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html" amzn-src-id="165568">http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165569">A foundation for value functions, policy gradients, exploration, and the RL framing used throughout the book.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165570">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165571">Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y.. "MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control." (2012). <a href="https://mujoco.org/" amzn-src-id="165572">https://mujoco.org/</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165573">The simulator lineage behind much modern robot learning, now extended through MJX and Warp workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165574">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165575">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-1: Robotics Transformer for real-world control at scale." (2022). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817" amzn-src-id="165576">https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165577">A landmark in large-scale robot policy learning with transformer policies.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165578">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165579">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818" amzn-src-id="165580">https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165581">A central reference for connecting web-scale VLM knowledge to robot actions.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165582">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165583">Open X-Embodiment Collaboration. "Open X-Embodiment: Robotic Learning Datasets and RT-X Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864" amzn-src-id="165584">https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165585">The cross-embodiment data and transfer reference used by the data chapters.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165586">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165587">Chi, C. et al.. "Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137" amzn-src-id="165588">https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165589">The practical diffusion policy reference for imitation learning and continuous action generation.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165590">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165591">Hafner, D. et al.. "Mastering Diverse Domains through World Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104" amzn-src-id="165592">https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165593">DreamerV3, a modern reference for latent world models and imagination-based control.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165594">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165595">Hugging Face. "LeRobot." (2024). <a href="https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot" amzn-src-id="165596">https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165597">The open robot-learning stack used for datasets, policies, demos, and low-cost embodied AI workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card" amzn-src-id="165598">
<p class="bib-ref" amzn-src-id="165599">Official documentation and source repositories for Probability, Estimation, and Optimization Refresher.</p>
<p class="bib-annotation" amzn-src-id="165600">Use official docs for install commands, current APIs, and version caveats before running the chapter lab.</p>
</div>
</section>



</body>
</html>
