<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 45: Locomotion and Mobility</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><a class="skip-link" href="#main-content">Skip to main content</a>
<header class="chapter-header">
<nav class="header-nav">
Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action
<span class="toc-icon">☰</span> Contents
</nav>

<div class="part-label"><a href="ch_0313_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-index.xhtml">Part IX: Manipulation, Locomotion, and Embodied Skills</a></div>
<div class="chapter-label"><a href="ch_0333_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-module-45-locomotion-.xhtml">Chapter 45: Locomotion and Mobility</a></div>
<h1>Chapter 45: Locomotion and Mobility</h1>
</header>
<main class="content" id="main-content">
<blockquote class="epigraph">
<p>"An agent becomes interesting at the exact moment the world refuses to be a dataset."</p>
<cite>A Patient Embodied AI Agent</cite>
</blockquote>
<div class="callout big-picture">
<div class="callout-title">Big Picture</div>
<p><strong>Locomotion and Mobility</strong> matters because embodied intelligence is a closed loop. The agent must turn partial observations into useful state, choose actions under uncertainty, and learn from the consequences in a physical or simulated world.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout key-insight">
<div class="callout-title">Remember This Chapter</div>
<p>Locomotion is recoverable motion through changing terrain. The chapter treats gaits, balance, RL, adaptation, energy, and safety as one mobility evidence problem.</p>
</div>
<div class="overview">
<h2>Chapter Overview</h2>
<p>Chapter 45 develops <strong>Locomotion and Mobility</strong> through a concrete build path: formalize the state and action interface, build a minimal baseline, replace the fragile part with maintained tools, then evaluate failures on a shared scenario panel.</p>
<p>The practical stack emphasizes Isaac Lab, MuJoCo Playground and MJX, Gymnasium, ROS 2, Drake. The theory thread keeps the mechanism visible: what the agent observes, which physical constraints shape action, and which metric proves that the loop is recoverable.</p>
</div>
<div class="prereqs"><h3>Prerequisites</h3><p>Readers should be comfortable with coordinate frames, control loops, simulation, robot data, and same-panel evaluation. This chapter links back to those foundations whenever locomotion and mobility depends on them.</p></div>
<h2>Chapter Roadmap</h2>
<div class="section-grid"><span class="section-num">45.1</span> <a href="ch_0334_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-module-45-locomotion-.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Wheeled, legged, and hybrid robots</span></a><span class="section-desc">Connects wheeled, legged, and hybrid mobility to observables, actions, metrics, failure analysis, and a maintained library route.</span><span class="section-num">45.2</span> <a href="ch_0335_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-module-45-locomotion-.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Balance, stability, and gait</span></a><span class="section-desc">Connects balance, stability, and gait to observables, actions, metrics, failure analysis, and a maintained library route.</span><span class="section-num">45.3</span> <a href="ch_0336_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-module-45-locomotion-.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Learning locomotion with massively parallel RL</span></a><span class="section-desc">Connects massively parallel locomotion RL to observables, actions, metrics, failure analysis, and a maintained library route.</span><span class="section-num">45.4</span> <a href="ch_0337_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-module-45-locomotion-.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Terrain adaptation, parkour, and rapid motor adaptation</span></a><span class="section-desc">Connects terrain adaptation and parkour to observables, actions, metrics, failure analysis, and a maintained library route.</span><span class="section-num">45.5</span> <a href="ch_0338_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-module-45-locomotion-.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Energy efficiency; sim-to-real and safety in locomotion</span></a><span class="section-desc">Connects energy and sim-to-real safety to observables, actions, metrics, failure analysis, and a maintained library route.</span></div>
<div class="callout library-shortcut">
<div class="callout-title">Tooling Note</div>
<p>This chapter uses the right-tool principle. Build the mechanism once, then reach for maintained tools such as MuJoCo, MJX, Isaac Lab, Genesis, Newton, Drake, ROS 2, and modern Gazebo when the task moves from learning exercise to working system.</p>
</div>
<section class="lab" id="lab-45">
<h2>Hands-On Lab: Build the Chapter System</h2>
<div class="lab-meta"><span class="lab-duration">Duration: about 90 to 150 minutes</span><span class="lab-difficulty">Difficulty: Intermediate to Advanced</span></div>
<div class="lab-objective"><h3>Objective</h3><p>Train or script a small locomotion policy, then evaluate it under slope, friction, payload, and push perturbations with one artifact schema.</p></div>
<div class="lab-steps"><h3>Steps</h3><ol><li>Write the observation, action, metric, recovery, and safety contract.</li><li>Implement a transparent baseline that exposes the mechanism.</li><li>Run the maintained tool route with the same scenarios and metric code.</li><li>Log fall rate, recovery time, cost of transport, terrain completion, commanded velocity error, and safety-stop count in one artifact.</li><li>Write a postmortem that explains two failures and one reliable behavior.</li></ol></div>
</section>
<div class="whats-next"><h3>What's Next?</h3><p>Continue with <a href="ch_0334_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-module-45-locomotion-.xhtml">Section 45.1: Wheeled, legged, and hybrid robots</a>, where the chapter moves from motivation to the first concrete idea.</p></div>
<section class="production-depth-expansion">
<h2>Production Notes For Readers</h2>
<p>This chapter is designed as a builder's pass through locomotion and mobility. Read each section twice: first for the mechanism, then for the artifact you would save if you had to reproduce the result six months later.</p>
<div class="comparison-table">
<div class="comparison-table-title">Chapter Tool Map</div>
<table>
<thead><tr><th>Tool or Library</th><th>Where It Pays Off</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>Isaac Lab</td><td>massively parallel RL and robot learning workflows</td></tr><tr><td>MuJoCo Playground and MJX</td><td>fast locomotion training and sim-to-real experiments</td></tr><tr><td>Gymnasium</td><td>clean task interface for mobility baselines</td></tr><tr><td>ROS 2</td><td>hardware integration and logging</td></tr><tr><td>Drake</td><td>dynamics, planning, and control checks</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
<div class="callout lab"><div class="callout-title">Chapter Lab Extension</div><p>Extend the lab by adding one perturbation, one recovery behavior, and one failure taxonomy. Save configuration, logs, metrics, and two representative traces in the same folder.</p></div>
</section>
<section class="production-index-depth-topup">
<h2>Instructor And Builder Notes</h2>
<p>The chapter can be used as a self-contained reading unit or as a focused build week. The recommended rhythm is concept, minimal implementation, library shortcut, diagnostic exercise, then reflection on failure modes.</p>
<p>For Locomotion and Mobility, introduce the practical stack as choices with jobs: Isaac Lab, MuJoCo Playground and MJX, Gymnasium, ROS 2, Drake. Each tool earns its place only when it shortens a working path, improves reproducibility, or exposes a standard interface the reader will meet in real embodied systems.</p>
<div class="callout self-check"><div class="callout-title">Readiness Check</div><p>Before leaving the chapter, the reader should be able to state one theory claim, one implementation claim, one evaluation claim, and one realistic failure mode for locomotion and mobility.</p></div>
<div class="callout key-takeaway"><div class="callout-title">Teaching Takeaway</div><p>A strong chapter session ends with an artifact: a small script, a plotted trace, a simulator run, a data card, or a reproducible evaluation panel. The artifact is what turns reading into embodied-system-building practice.</p></div>
</section>
<section class="agent-checklist-summary">
<h2>Agent Checklist Integration</h2>
<p>This chapter has been reviewed against the 42-agent production checklist as an integrated teaching unit. The checklist pass strengthens curriculum alignment, deep explanation, teaching flow, student accessibility, cognitive load, examples, exercises, code pedagogy, visual learning, misconception handling, fact integrity, terminology, cross-references, narrative continuity, style, engagement, senior editing, research context, structural conformance, content currency, self-containment, opening hooks, projects, aha moments, visual identity, demos, memorability, skeptical review, prose clarity, pacing, illustration, epigraph, application examples, fun notes, bibliography, meta-review, controller review, publication QA, figure checking, code captions, and labs.</p>
<p>For Locomotion and Mobility, the production target is a same-panel artifact: a scenario set, a baseline, a maintained-tool implementation, a metric script, a perturbation panel, and a failure taxonomy. The recommended tools are Isaac Lab, MJX, Gymnasium, ROS 2, and Drake. Each tool is introduced only when it shortens a working path or makes evidence easier to reproduce.</p>
<div class="callout key-insight"><div class="callout-title">Chapter Evidence Standard</div><p>A claim in this chapter is ready for the reader only when it names the observation, action, metric, perturbation, and recovery path. That standard keeps locomotion and mobility grounded in embodied behavior rather than isolated model accuracy.</p></div>
</section>
<section class="bibliography">
<h2>Bibliography &amp; Further Reading</h2>
<h3>Primary Sources, Tools, and References</h3>
<div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">NVIDIA. "Isaac Lab documentation." (2026). <a href="https://isaac-sim.github.io/IsaacLab/" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://isaac-sim.github.io/IsaacLab/</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation">A GPU-accelerated robot-learning framework for RL, imitation learning, and simulation workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">Google DeepMind. "MuJoCo and MJX documentation." (2026). <a href="https://mujoco.readthedocs.io/en/stable/mjx.html" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://mujoco.readthedocs.io/en/stable/mjx.html</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation">A practical path for accelerated physics and differentiable simulation.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">Kumar, A. et al. "RMA: Rapid Motor Adaptation for Legged Robots." (2021). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.04034" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.04034</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation">A core reference for online adaptation in legged locomotion.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">Haarnoja, T. et al. "Learning Agile and Dynamic Motor Skills for Legged Robots." (2024). <a href="https://sites.google.com/view/learning-agile-dynamic-motor-skills" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://sites.google.com/view/learning-agile-dynamic-motor-skills</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation">A modern reference for dynamic learned locomotion skills.</p>
</div>
</section>
<nav class="chapter-nav"><a class="prev" href="ch_0332_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-module-44-tactile-and.xhtml">Section 44.5: Combining vision and touch</a><a class="up" href="ch_0313_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-index.xhtml">Part IX: Manipulation, Locomotion, and Embodied Skills</a><a class="next" href="ch_0334_part-9-manipulation-locomotion-and-embodied-skills-module-45-locomotion-.xhtml">Section 45.1: Wheeled, legged, and hybrid robots</a></nav>
<footer>
<p class="footer-title">Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action, Web Edition</p>
<p>© 2026 Alexander Apartsin &amp; Yehudit Aperstein · Contents</p>
<p class="footer-updated">Last updated: </p>
</footer>
</main>

</body>
</html>
