<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Appendix D: PyTorch and JAX for Embodied AI</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><a class="skip-link" href="#main-content">Skip to main content</a>
<header class="chapter-header">
<nav class="header-nav">
Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action
<span class="toc-icon">☰</span> Contents
</nav>

<div class="part-label"><a href="ch_0443_appendices-index.xhtml">Appendices</a></div>
<div class="chapter-label"><a href="ch_0447_appendices-appendix-d-pytorch-jax-index.xhtml">Appendix D</a></div>
<h1>Appendix D: PyTorch and JAX for Embodied AI</h1>
</header>
<main class="content" id="main-content">
<div class="callout big-picture">
<div class="callout-title">Why This Appendix Exists</div>
<p>PyTorch and JAX for Embodied AI supports the self-contained promise of the book. It gives readers enough reference material to continue without opening a second textbook.</p>
</div>
<h2>Reference Notes</h2>
<p>This appendix should be used on demand. The main chapters link here when a mathematical tool, software package, benchmark, compute estimate, or citation convention needs a compact refresher.</p>
<h2>Practical Checklist</h2>
<ol><li>Identify the concept or tool needed by the chapter.</li><li>Review the minimal definition and notation.</li><li>Run the smallest example.</li><li>Return to the chapter with the missing prerequisite restored.</li></ol>
<div class="callout library-shortcut">
<div class="callout-title">Operational Shortcut</div>
<p>For tools and libraries, prefer official documentation and pinned environment files. For math and notation, prefer the definitions used in this book so symbols stay consistent.</p>
</div>
<section class="bibliography">
<h2>Bibliography &amp; Further Reading</h2>
<h3>Foundational Papers, Tools, and References</h3>
<div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G.. "Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction." (2018). <a href="http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html" rel="noopener" target="_blank">http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation">A foundation for value functions, policy gradients, exploration, and the RL framing used throughout the book.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y.. "MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control." (2012). <a href="https://mujoco.org/" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://mujoco.org/</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation">The simulator lineage behind much modern robot learning, now extended through MJX and Warp workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-1: Robotics Transformer for real-world control at scale." (2022). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.06817</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation">A landmark in large-scale robot policy learning with transformer policies.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">Brohan, A. et al.. "RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation">A central reference for connecting web-scale VLM knowledge to robot actions.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">Open X-Embodiment Collaboration. "Open X-Embodiment: Robotic Learning Datasets and RT-X Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation">The cross-embodiment data and transfer reference used by the data chapters.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">Chi, C. et al.. "Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04137</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation">The practical diffusion policy reference for imitation learning and continuous action generation.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">Hafner, D. et al.. "Mastering Diverse Domains through World Models." (2023). <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04104</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation">DreamerV3, a modern reference for latent world models and imagination-based control.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">Hugging Face. "LeRobot." (2024). <a href="https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot</a></p>
<p class="bib-annotation">The open robot-learning stack used for datasets, policies, demos, and low-cost embodied AI workflows.</p>
</div><div class="bib-entry-card">
<p class="bib-ref">Official documentation and source repositories for PyTorch and JAX for Embodied AI.</p>
<p class="bib-annotation">Use official docs for install commands, current APIs, and version caveats before running the chapter lab.</p>
</div>
</section>
<nav class="chapter-nav"><a class="prev" href="ch_0446_appendices-appendix-c-embodied-ai-toolbox-index.xhtml">Appendix C: The Embodied AI Toolbox</a><a class="up" href="ch_0443_appendices-index.xhtml">Appendices</a><a class="next" href="ch_0448_appendices-appendix-e-compute-recipes-index.xhtml">Appendix E: Compute Recipes</a></nav><footer>
<p class="footer-title">Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action, Web Edition</p>
<p>© 2026 Alexander Apartsin &amp; Yehudit Aperstein · Contents</p>
<p class="footer-updated">Last updated: </p>
</footer>
</main>

</body>
</html>
