<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Part II: Mathematical, Robotics, and Control Foundations</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><a class="skip-link" href="#main-content">Skip to main content</a>
<header class="chapter-header">
<nav class="header-nav">
Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action
<span class="toc-icon">☰</span> Contents
</nav>

<div class="part-label">Book Part</div>
<div class="chapter-label">Part II</div>
<h1>Part II: Mathematical, Robotics, and Control Foundations</h1>
</header>
<main class="content" id="main-content">
<div class="part-overview">
<h2>Part Overview</h2>
<p>This part covers the geometry, kinematics, dynamics, control, and sensing that make physical agents intelligible. It connects formal ideas with the tools and labs needed to build working systems.</p>
<p>Chapters: 5. Each chapter includes theory, recipes, practical code, a library shortcut, and exercises.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout big-picture">
<div class="callout-title">Why This Part Matters</div>
<p>Mathematical, Robotics, and Control Foundations gives the reader a working layer of the embodied AI stack. Later chapters assume this layer when agents must perceive, plan, act, and recover from mistakes.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0037_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-04-spatial-r.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 4</span> Spatial Representation and Coordinate Frames</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops spatial representation and coordinate frames as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">4.1</span> Why space is the substrate of embodiment</li><li><span class="sec-num">4.2</span> Points, vectors, poses, frames</li><li><span class="sec-num">4.3</span> Rotations: matrices, Euler angles, axis-angle, quaternions; pitfalls</li><li><span class="sec-num">4.4</span> Rigid transforms, homogeneous coordinates, SE(3)</li><li><span class="sec-num">4.5</span> 2D and 3D transformations; transform trees (tf in ROS)</li><li><span class="sec-num">4.6</span> Camera, body, and world frames</li><li><span class="sec-num">4.7</span> Common frame mistakes and how to debug them</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0045_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-05-kinematic.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 5</span> Kinematics and Robot Motion</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops kinematics and robot motion as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">5.1</span> Position, velocity, acceleration; twists</li><li><span class="sec-num">5.2</span> Holonomic vs. non-holonomic motion</li><li><span class="sec-num">5.3</span> Differential-drive and car-like robots</li><li><span class="sec-num">5.4</span> Robot arms, joints, the kinematic chain</li><li><span class="sec-num">5.5</span> Forward kinematics</li><li><span class="sec-num">5.6</span> Inverse kinematics: analytic, numerical (Jacobian), and learned</li><li><span class="sec-num">5.7</span> Jacobians, singularities, manipulability</li><li><span class="sec-num">5.8</span> Motion constraints</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0054_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-06-dynamics-.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 6</span> Dynamics and Simulation Math</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops dynamics and simulation math as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">6.1</span> From kinematics to dynamics: forces, torques, inertia</li><li><span class="sec-num">6.2</span> Rigid-body dynamics; the manipulator equation</li><li><span class="sec-num">6.3</span> Contact, friction, and why contact-rich sim is hard</li><li><span class="sec-num">6.4</span> Numerical integration and stability</li><li><span class="sec-num">6.5</span> Differentiable physics: what it buys you</li><li><span class="sec-num">6.6</span> Why GPU-parallel simulation changed robot learning</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0061_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-07-control-f.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 7</span> Control for AI Practitioners</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops Control for AI Practitioners as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">7.1</span> Open-loop vs. closed-loop control</li><li><span class="sec-num">7.2</span> Feedback, error, stability, overshoot, oscillation</li><li><span class="sec-num">7.3</span> PID control, intuition and tuning</li><li><span class="sec-num">7.4</span> State-space control, LQR</li><li><span class="sec-num">7.5</span> Model predictive control (MPC) as receding-horizon optimization</li><li><span class="sec-num">7.6</span> Operational-space and whole-body control (preview for humanoids)</li><li><span class="sec-num">7.7</span> Controllers vs. policies; when learning helps and when it makes control unsafe</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0069_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-08-sensors-p.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 8</span> Sensors, Perception Hardware, and State Estimation</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops sensors, perception hardware, and state estimation as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">8.1</span> What sensors provide and what they cost</li><li><span class="sec-num">8.2</span> Cameras, depth (stereo/structured light/ToF), LiDAR</li><li><span class="sec-num">8.3</span> IMU, wheel odometry, joint encoders, proprioception</li><li><span class="sec-num">8.4</span> Tactile and force/torque sensing (GelSight, DIGIT): preview</li><li><span class="sec-num">8.5</span> Sensor noise and uncertainty models</li><li><span class="sec-num">8.6</span> Bayesian filtering: Kalman, EKF, particle filters</li><li><span class="sec-num">8.7</span> Sensor fusion intuition and practice</li><li><span class="sec-num">8.8</span> Perception as an imperfect window into the world</li></ul></div>
</div>
<section class="production-depth-expansion">
<h2>Part II Integration Map</h2>
<p>Part II now carries one explicit robotics contract across every chapter: name the representation, state the timing and uncertainty assumptions, build the smallest inspectable baseline, use the maintained library path, and compare both paths with one shared evidence artifact.</p>
<div class="comparison-table">
<div class="comparison-table-title">Mathematical Robotics Stack</div>
<table>
<thead><tr><th>Chapter</th><th>Core Invariant</th><th>Practical Libraries</th><th>Evidence Check</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>Chapter 4: Spatial Representation and Coordinate Frames</td><td>coordinate frames, rigid transforms, SE(3), and transform-tree debugging</td><td>SciPy Rotation, ROS 2 tf2, spatialmath-python, Drake, OpenCV calibration</td><td>Most frame bugs look like weak perception or weak control. First test whether points, vectors, poses, and timestamps were transformed through the same frame tree.</td></tr><tr><td>Chapter 5: Kinematics and Robot Motion</td><td>twists, constraints, forward kinematics, inverse kinematics, Jacobians, and manipulability</td><td>Pinocchio, Robotics Toolbox for Python, MoveIt 2, Drake, ROS 2 control</td><td>Kinematic failures often arrive as a plausible pose with an impossible motion. Inspect joint limits, Jacobian rank, constraint assumptions, and frame choice before blaming the planner.</td></tr><tr><td>Chapter 6: Dynamics and Simulation Math</td><td>forces, torques, inertia, contact, integration, differentiable physics, and GPU-parallel simulation</td><td>MuJoCo, MJX, Drake, Pinocchio, Isaac Lab</td><td>A simulation that looks smooth can still be physically misleading. Check timestep sensitivity, contact stiffness, damping, friction cones, and actuator saturation before trusting policy performance.</td></tr><tr><td>Chapter 7: Control for AI Practitioners</td><td>feedback, stability, PID, LQR, MPC, operational-space control, policies, and safety filters</td><td>python-control, CasADi, Drake, do-mpc, ROS 2 control</td><td>A learned policy can hide an unstable inner loop until the disturbance changes. Check update rate, delay, saturation, integral windup, and fallback behavior before scaling training.</td></tr><tr><td>Chapter 8: Sensors, Perception Hardware, and State Estimation</td><td>sensor models, calibration, noise, Bayesian filtering, fusion, latency, and partial observability</td><td>OpenCV, ROS 2 robot_localization, FilterPy, Kalibr, Open3D</td><td>Sensor failures often masquerade as bad planning. Check calibration drift, unsynchronized clocks, frame mismatch, covariance overconfidence, and latency before changing the policy.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
<div class="callout key-insight"><div class="callout-title">Part II Memory Anchor</div><p>Geometry says where, kinematics says what motion is possible, dynamics says what motion costs, control says how errors are corrected, and estimation says what the agent can know on time.</p></div>
<div class="callout exercise"><div class="callout-title">Part II Synthesis Exercise</div><p>Choose one embodied task and fill one row for every Part II layer: frame, motion model, dynamics assumption, controller, sensor model, latency budget, library shortcut, and failure label. The row is complete only when all layers share the same task, seed, split, and metric artifact.</p></div>
</section>
<div class="whats-next"><h3>What's Next?</h3><p>After this part, <a href="ch_0078_part-3-simulation-tooling-and-the-modern-stack-index.xhtml">Part III: Simulation, Tooling, and the Modern Stack extends the stack</a>.</p></div>
<nav class="landing-nav">Table of ContentsBuilding Embodied AIFrom Perception to Autonomous Ac...<a class="next" href="ch_0078_part-3-simulation-tooling-and-the-modern-stack-index.xhtml">Part III: Simulation, Tooling, and the Modern Stack</a></nav>
<footer>
<p class="footer-title">Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action, Web Edition</p>
<p>© 2026 Alexander Apartsin &amp; Yehudit Aperstein · Contents</p>
<p class="footer-updated">Last updated: </p>
</footer>
</main>

</body>
</html>
