<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Chapter 28: 3D Perception and Neural Scene Representations</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><a class="skip-link" href="#main-content">Skip to main content</a>
<header class="chapter-header">
<nav class="header-nav">
Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action
<span class="toc-icon">☰</span> Contents
</nav>

<div class="part-label"><a href="ch_0201_part-6-embodied-perception-index.xhtml">Part VI: Embodied Perception</a></div>
<div class="chapter-label"><a href="ch_0210_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml">Chapter 28: 3D Perception and Neural Scene Representations</a></div>
<h1>Chapter 28: 3D Perception and Neural Scene Representations</h1>
</header>
<main class="content" id="main-content">
<blockquote class="epigraph"><p>"An agent becomes interesting at the exact moment perception changes what it dares to do next."</p><cite>A Patient Embodied AI Agent</cite></blockquote>
<div class="callout big-picture"><div class="callout-title">Big Picture</div><p><strong>3D Perception and Neural Scene Representations</strong> turns perception into action-ready state. A flat image can tell the agent what is visible. A 3D scene representation tells it what space it can occupy, what it can touch, and what might be hidden behind the next move.</p></div>
<div class="callout key-insight"><div class="callout-title">Remember This Chapter</div><p>The durable test is not whether a model looks impressive. The test is whether it improves a robot's next action while leaving a clear evidence trail for debugging.</p></div>
<div class="overview"><h2>Chapter Overview</h2><p>Chapter 28 develops <strong>3D Perception and Neural Scene Representations</strong> as a working piece of the embodied AI stack. It connects visual or spatial evidence to state estimates, action choices, visual servoing loops, timing budgets, and failure labels.</p><p>The chapter follows the right-tool rhythm used across the book: build the mechanism once, then move to maintained tools such as Open3D, PyTorch, OpenCV, Gaussian Splatting workflows.</p></div>
<div class="prereqs"><h3>Prerequisites</h3><p>Readers should be comfortable with Python, tensors, coordinate frames, sensor noise, and the perception-action loop. Useful refreshers appear in <a href="ch_0037_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-04-spatial-r.xhtml">Chapter 4</a>, <a href="ch_0069_part-2-mathematical-robotics-and-control-foundations-module-08-sensors-p.xhtml">Chapter 8</a>, and <a href="ch_0109_part-3-simulation-tooling-and-the-modern-stack-module-13-domain-randomiz.xhtml">Chapter 13</a>.</p></div>
<h2>Chapter Roadmap</h2><div class="section-grid"><span class="section-num">28.1</span> <a href="ch_0211_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Why 3D matters for manipulation and navigation</span></a><span class="section-desc">3D is the bridge from pixels to reachable, traversable, and occluded space.</span><span class="section-num">28.2</span> <a href="ch_0212_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Point clouds and depth maps</span></a><span class="section-desc">depth maps become point clouds when pixel coordinates are lifted through camera intrinsics.</span><span class="section-num">28.3</span> <a href="ch_0213_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml"><span class="section-title">3D detection and scene reconstruction</span></a><span class="section-desc">the agent needs object hypotheses that live in world coordinates and survive across views.</span><span class="section-num">28.4</span> <a href="ch_0214_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Occupancy grids and voxel maps</span></a><span class="section-desc">occupancy models store where the world is free, occupied, or unknown.</span><span class="section-num">28.5</span> <a href="ch_0215_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml"><span class="section-title">NeRF: implicit radiance fields</span></a><span class="section-desc">a NeRF stores a scene as a function from 3D position and view direction to density and color.</span><span class="section-num">28.6</span> <a href="ch_0216_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml"><span class="section-title">3D Gaussian Splatting: explicit, editable, real-time</span></a><span class="section-desc">Gaussian splats store scene content as explicit ellipsoids that can render quickly and be edited locally.</span><span class="section-num">28.7</span> <a href="ch_0217_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml"><span class="section-title">Scene representations for robotics: SLAM, real2sim, manipulation</span></a><span class="section-desc">a robot-ready scene representation must support pose tracking, action planning, and updates after contact.</span></div>
<div class="callout library-shortcut"><div class="callout-title">Tooling Note</div><p>This chapter uses the right-tool principle. The teaching baseline exposes units, frames, uncertainty, and logging. The shortcut stack uses maintained tools to handle optimized kernels, visualization, data formats, simulation hooks, and deployment interfaces.</p></div>
<section class="lab" id="lab-28">
<h2>Hands-On Lab: Build A 3D Perception and Neural Scene Representations Evidence Panel</h2>
<div class="lab-meta"><span class="lab-duration">Duration: about 75 minutes</span><span class="lab-difficulty">Difficulty: Intermediate</span></div>
<div class="lab-objective"><h3>Objective</h3><p>Build a small evidence panel that compares a hand-built baseline with a maintained tool workflow for this chapter.</p></div>
<div class="lab-skills"><h3>What You'll Practice</h3><ul><li>Writing an observation, action, metric, and perturbation contract.</li><li>Building one inspectable baseline before using a library shortcut.</li><li>Logging success, failure labels, latency, and recovery behavior.</li><li>Explaining which result would change a robot action.</li></ul></div>
<div class="lab-prereqs"><h3>Setup</h3><p>Use a Python environment with NumPy. Add chapter-specific tools only after the baseline manifest runs.</p><pre><code class="language-bash"><span class="c1"># Create a small local environment for the chapter lab.</span>
python<span class="w"> </span>-m<span class="w"> </span>pip<span class="w"> </span>install<span class="w"> </span>numpy</code></pre><div class="code-caption">Code Fragment 28.L1 installs NumPy for the chapter evidence manifest before heavier perception tools are added.</div></div>
<div class="lab-steps"><h3>Steps</h3><div class="lab-step"><h4>Step 1: Define The Contract</h4><p>Write observation, action, metric, and perturbation fields for two sections.</p></div><div class="lab-step"><h4>Step 2: Run The Baseline Manifest</h4><p>Create one comparable row per section, then fill realistic values from the section text.</p><pre><code class="language-python"><span class="c1"># Start a Chapter 28 evidence manifest.</span>
<span class="c1"># Add one row per section and keep metrics construct matched.</span>
<span class="n">sections</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="p">[</span><span class="s1">'28.1'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'28.2'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'28.3'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'28.4'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'28.5'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'28.6'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'28.7'</span><span class="p">]</span>
<span class="n">manifest</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="p">[</span>
<span class="p">{</span><span class="s2">"section"</span><span class="p">:</span> <span class="n">s</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s2">"metric"</span><span class="p">:</span> <span class="s2">"closed_loop_success"</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s2">"perturbation"</span><span class="p">:</span> <span class="s2">"occlusion_or_noise"</span><span class="p">}</span>
<span class="k">for</span> <span class="n">s</span> <span class="ow">in</span> <span class="n">sections</span>
<span class="p">]</span>
<span class="nb">print</span><span class="p">(</span><span class="n">manifest</span><span class="p">[</span><span class="mi">0</span><span class="p">])</span></code></pre><div class="code-caption">Code Fragment 28.L2 creates `manifest` rows for Chapter 28, giving each section the same metric and perturbation fields.</div></div><div class="lab-step"><h4>Step 3: Add The Library Shortcut</h4><p>Replace one baseline field with a maintained tool call, while keeping the output schema unchanged.</p></div><div class="lab-step"><h4>Step 4: Run One Perturbation</h4><p>Add occlusion, noise, pose drift, map error, or goal ambiguity. Record whether the action changed.</p></div><div class="lab-step"><h4>Step 5: Write The Postmortem</h4><p>Explain the strongest result, the most informative failure, and the next diagnostic test.</p></div></div>
<div class="lab-expected"><h3>Expected Output</h3><p>A table with one row per tested section, one baseline result, one shortcut result, one perturbation label, and one failure label.</p></div>
<div class="lab-stretch"><h3>Stretch Goals</h3><ul><li>Add a plot of metric versus perturbation strength.</li><li>Run the same manifest in a Habitat-style simulator or ROS 2 bag replay.</li><li>Export two failure cases with enough metadata to reproduce them later.</li></ul></div>
<div class="kindle-disclosure lab-solution"><p class="kindle-disclosure-title">Complete Solution</p><pre><code class="language-python"><span class="c1"># Start a Chapter 28 evidence manifest.</span>
<span class="c1"># Add one row per section and keep metrics construct matched.</span>
<span class="n">sections</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="p">[</span><span class="s1">'28.1'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'28.2'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'28.3'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'28.4'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'28.5'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'28.6'</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s1">'28.7'</span><span class="p">]</span>
<span class="n">manifest</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="p">[</span>
<span class="p">{</span><span class="s2">"section"</span><span class="p">:</span> <span class="n">s</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s2">"metric"</span><span class="p">:</span> <span class="s2">"closed_loop_success"</span><span class="p">,</span> <span class="s2">"perturbation"</span><span class="p">:</span> <span class="s2">"occlusion_or_noise"</span><span class="p">}</span>
<span class="k">for</span> <span class="n">s</span> <span class="ow">in</span> <span class="n">sections</span>
<span class="p">]</span>
<span class="nb">print</span><span class="p">(</span><span class="n">manifest</span><span class="p">[</span><span class="mi">0</span><span class="p">])</span>
<span class="k">for</span> <span class="n">row</span> <span class="ow">in</span> <span class="n">manifest</span><span class="p">:</span>
<span class="n">row</span><span class="p">[</span><span class="s2">"baseline_score"</span><span class="p">]</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="mf">0.72</span>
<span class="n">row</span><span class="p">[</span><span class="s2">"shortcut_score"</span><span class="p">]</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="mf">0.81</span>
<span class="n">row</span><span class="p">[</span><span class="s2">"failure_label"</span><span class="p">]</span> <span class="o">=</span> <span class="s2">"perception_or_planning_interface"</span>
<span class="nb">print</span><span class="p">(</span><span class="n">manifest</span><span class="p">)</span></code></pre><div class="code-caption">Code Fragment 28.L3 fills the manifest with comparable baseline and shortcut fields for a same-panel chapter lab.</div></div>
</section>
<section class="production-depth-expansion"><h2>Instructor And Builder Notes</h2><p>Use this chapter as a complete teaching unit: concept, minimal implementation, library shortcut, diagnostic perturbation, and postmortem. The pattern prevents a perception model from being evaluated in isolation and never tested as part of the agent loop.</p><div class="comparison-table"><div class="comparison-table-title">Chapter Tool Map</div><table><thead><tr><th>Tool or Library</th><th>Where It Pays Off</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>Open3D</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr><tr><td>PyTorch</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr><tr><td>OpenCV</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr><tr><td>Gaussian Splatting workflows</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr><tr><td>Nerfstudio</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr><tr><td>ROS 2</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr><tr><td>Habitat-style simulators</td><td>Use when it shortens the path from mechanism to reproducible embodied evidence.</td></tr></tbody></table></div><div class="callout self-check"><div class="callout-title">Readiness Check</div><p>Before leaving the chapter, the reader should be able to state one theory claim, one implementation claim, one evaluation claim, and one realistic failure mode.</p></div><div class="callout key-takeaway"><div class="callout-title">Teaching Takeaway</div><p>A strong chapter session ends with an artifact: a script, trace, simulator run, data card, map, or reproducible evaluation panel.</p></div></section>
<div class="whats-next"><h3>What's Next?</h3><p>Start with <a href="ch_0211_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml">Section 28.1: Why 3D matters for manipulation and navigation</a>. After this chapter, continue to <a href="ch_0218_part-6-embodied-perception-module-29-localization-and-mapping-slam-index.xhtml">Chapter 29: Localization and Mapping (SLAM)</a>.</p></div>
<section class="bibliography"><h2>Bibliography &amp; Further Reading</h2><h3>Foundational Papers, Tools, and References</h3><div class="bib-entry-card"><p class="bib-ref">Mildenhall, B. et al.. "NeRF: Representing Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for View Synthesis." ECCV, 2020. <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.08934" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.08934</a></p><p class="bib-annotation">The foundational neural radiance field paper behind implicit scene representations.</p></div><div class="bib-entry-card"><p class="bib-ref">Kerbl, B. et al.. "3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time Radiance Field Rendering." ACM TOG, 2023. <a href="https://repo-sam.inria.fr/fungraph/3d-gaussian-splatting/" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://repo-sam.inria.fr/fungraph/3d-gaussian-splatting/</a></p><p class="bib-annotation">The reference for explicit Gaussian scene elements and real-time rendering.</p></div><div class="bib-entry-card"><p class="bib-ref">Zhou, Q.-Y., Park, J., and Koltun, V.. "Open3D: A Modern Library for 3D Data Processing." arXiv, 2018. <a href="https://www.open3d.org/" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://www.open3d.org/</a></p><p class="bib-annotation">A practical library reference for point clouds, meshes, registration, and visualization.</p></div><div class="bib-entry-card"><p class="bib-ref">Tancik, M. et al.. "Nerfstudio: A Modular Framework for Neural Radiance Field Development." SIGGRAPH, 2023. <a href="https://docs.nerf.studio/" rel="noopener" target="_blank">https://docs.nerf.studio/</a></p><p class="bib-annotation">A maintained workflow for training, inspecting, and exporting neural scene models.</p></div></section>
<nav class="chapter-nav"><a class="prev" href="ch_0209_part-6-embodied-perception-module-27-visual-perception-for-action-sectio.xhtml">Section 27.7: When perception failures become action...</a><a class="up" href="ch_0201_part-6-embodied-perception-index.xhtml">Part VI: Embodied Perception</a><a class="next" href="ch_0211_part-6-embodied-perception-module-28-3d-perception-and-neural-scene-repr.xhtml">Section 28.1: Why 3D matters for manipulation and na...</a></nav>
<footer>
<p class="footer-title">Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action, Web Edition</p>
<p>© 2026 Alexander Apartsin &amp; Yehudit Aperstein · Contents</p>
<p class="footer-updated">Last updated: </p>
</footer>
</main>

</body>
</html>
