<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Part XI: Evaluation, Safety, Robustness, and Deployment</title>
    <link href="../styles/book.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/pygments.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    <link href="../styles/epub_overrides.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body><a class="skip-link" href="#main-content">Skip to main content</a>
<header class="chapter-header">
<nav class="header-nav">
Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action
<span class="toc-icon">☰</span> Contents
</nav>

<div class="part-label">Book Part</div>
<div class="chapter-label">Part XI</div>
<h1>Part XI: Evaluation, Safety, Robustness, and Deployment</h1>
</header>
<main class="content" id="main-content">
<div class="part-overview">
<h2>Part Overview</h2>
<p>This part covers metrics, uncertainty, safety filters, deployment architecture, and operational discipline. It connects formal ideas with the tools and labs needed to build working systems.</p>
<p>Chapters: 4. Each chapter includes theory, recipes, practical code, a library shortcut, and exercises.</p>
</div>
<div class="callout big-picture">
<div class="callout-title">Why This Part Matters</div>
<p>Evaluation, Safety, Robustness, and Deployment gives the reader a working layer of the embodied AI stack. Later chapters assume this layer when agents must perceive, plan, act, and recover from mistakes.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0381_part-11-evaluation-safety-robustness-and-deployment-module-52-evaluating.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 52</span> Evaluating Embodied Systems</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops evaluating embodied systems as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">52.1</span> Why accuracy is not enough</li><li><span class="sec-num">52.2</span> Success rate, path efficiency, time and energy cost</li><li><span class="sec-num">52.3</span> Safety violations and constraint satisfaction</li><li><span class="sec-num">52.4</span> Robustness and generalization metrics</li><li><span class="sec-num">52.5</span> Reproducible evaluation: SIMPLER and sim-as-proxy</li><li><span class="sec-num">52.6</span> Real-world evaluation hygiene; benchmark design</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0388_part-11-evaluation-safety-robustness-and-deployment-module-53-robustness.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 53</span> Robustness and Uncertainty</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops robustness and uncertainty as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">53.1</span> What goes wrong: sensor noise, distribution shift</li><li><span class="sec-num">53.2</span> Model uncertainty and calibration</li><li><span class="sec-num">53.3</span> Out-of-distribution detection</li><li><span class="sec-num">53.4</span> Runtime monitoring and fail-safe behavior</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0393_part-11-evaluation-safety-robustness-and-deployment-module-54-safety-in-.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 54</span> Safety in Embodied AI</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops safety in embodied AI as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">54.1</span> Why embodied safety is different (physical harm)</li><li><span class="sec-num">54.2</span> Constraint violations and safe exploration</li><li><span class="sec-num">54.3</span> Control barrier functions and Hamilton-Jacobi reachability</li><li><span class="sec-num">54.4</span> Shielded policies and safety filters</li><li><span class="sec-num">54.5</span> Human override and safety testing</li><li><span class="sec-num">54.6</span> Deployment approval and safety cases</li></ul></div>
</div><div class="chapter-card">
<div class="chapter-card-header"><a href="ch_0400_part-11-evaluation-safety-robustness-and-deployment-module-55-deployment.xhtml"><span class="mod-num">Chapter 55</span> Deployment Architecture</a></div>
<div class="chapter-card-body"><p>This chapter develops deployment architecture as part of the embodied AI stack.</p><ul class="section-list"><li><span class="sec-num">55.1</span> From notebook to robot</li><li><span class="sec-num">55.2</span> Real-time inference and control rates</li><li><span class="sec-num">55.3</span> Edge vs. cloud-robot computation; asynchronous inference</li><li><span class="sec-num">55.4</span> Logging, monitoring, model updates</li><li><span class="sec-num">55.5</span> Failure recovery, security, maintenance</li></ul></div>
</div>
<div class="whats-next"><h3>What's Next?</h3><p>After this part, <a href="ch_0406_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-index.xhtml">Part XII extends the stack with frontier problems and capstone builds</a>.</p></div>
<nav class="landing-nav">Table of ContentsBuilding Embodied AIFrom Perception to Autonomous Ac...<a class="next" href="ch_0406_part-12-frontiers-capstones-and-course-design-index.xhtml">Part XII: Frontiers, Capstones, and Course Design</a></nav>
<footer>
<p class="footer-title">Building Embodied AI: From Perception to Autonomous Action, Web Edition</p>
<p>© 2026 Alexander Apartsin &amp; Yehudit Aperstein · Contents</p>
<p class="footer-updated">Last updated: </p>
</footer>
</main>

</body>
</html>
